 Hello, hello, hello.  (Applause.)  It’s good to be back in Syracuse.  (Applause.)  I fell in love with this place, but I fell in love with a girl before I did that.  (Laughter.)

Come — please, all, have a seat.

Shannon, thanks for that introduction and thank you for your brothers and sisters in the — in the building trades, what they’re doing to help build a future here in Syracuse.

You know, before I start, I want to take a moment to honor

two officers who have already been mentioned — two fallen heroes who were killed in the line of duty this month: Lieutenant Michael Hoosock and — County Sheriff Department — and Syracuse Police Officer Michael Jensen.

We pray for their loved ones, whose hearts have been broken.  You know, every time a police officer puts on that shield every morning, their husband or wife, whatever it is, their child worries about will they get that phone call — will they get that phone call.

I got one of those phone calls in a different circumstance — find out you’ve lost part of your soul, lost part of your heart.

For — the entire Syracuse community is grieving, and we’re grieving with you.

You know, to the men and women in law enforcement here and across the country, you represent the best of us.  You really do.  It’s one of the toughest jobs in America — one of the toughest jobs.  And to the families, who I hope to get to meet shortly, I say, “My heart goes out to you.”  Thank you.  And God bless you all.

Folks, I want to thank Governor Hochul for having us here today and for her partnership.  And thanks to Chuck Schumer, a relentless advocate for this project we — we’re here to talk about today.

County Executive McMahon, it’s good to be back in a place that meant so much to me in my life.

I also want to thank Governor Little of Idaho and — and Boise Mayor McLean for joining us.

Micron’s CEO, Sanjay, thank you for your leadership and investment in America.  We tried to entice you a little bit with a couple hundre- – you know, billions of dollars, but you came.  (Laughter.)  It seemed to work.

And to all the union leaders here, including Randi Weingarten, the American Federation of Teachers, thank you for showing the world that we can do big things again in America.

And all — folks, all over the years I’ve asked business leaders like Sanjay –- because the other team kept criticizing me for wanting to make these investments, you know, things like the — the infrastructure bill, which was over a trillion dollars.  And we’re going to have in- — we have an Infrastructure Decade coming.  The last guy had Infrastructure Week and never showed up.  (Laughter.) 

But — but, you know, I asked him — I was told that, you know, “This is a government intervention.”  I said, “Sure in the hell is.”  (Laughter and applause.)

I ask every business leader I know — not a joke — “When the federal government makes a multi-billion-dollar investment in something, does that encourage you or discourage you from getting engaged?”  Well, guess what?  Every single solitary leader said, overwhelmingly, yes, it encourages them to get engaged.  And so, that’s why we’re here today.

You know, during the pandemic, folks, everyone learned about supply chains.  You may remember we had a global shortage of semiconductors — smaller than the tip of your finger, and now it’s even smaller than that — that would help power everything in our lives from smartphones to cars to dishwashers, satellites. 

We invented those chips here in America.  We invented them. We made them move.  We modernized them.  But over time, we stopped — we used to have 40 percent of this market.  And over time, we stopped making them.

So, when the pandemic shut down the chips factories overseas, prices of everything went up at — here at home.  That semiconductor shortage drove one third of the surge in inflation in 2021, caused long wait lines of all kinds of products.

Folks, I determined that I’m never going to let us be vulnerable to wait lines again.  Wh- — if it’s essential, we’re going to make it here in America.

And together — (applause) — and, by the way, that’s not hyperbole; that’s literal.  Together with Schumer, Leader and I, we took action to make sure these chips are made in America again, creating tens of thousands — and I mean tens of thousands — of good-paying jobs, bringing prices down for everyone.

In 2022, together with Sch- — Leader Schumer, we wrote the CHIPS and Science Act.  We used to invest significant amounts of money in research and development.  We stopped doing it, but I was determined we were going to do it again.  It’s one of the most significant science and technology investments in our history.

And two months later, I came to Syracuse to celebrate Micron’s historic plan to build the biggest semiconductor manufacturing site in all of America, one of the biggest in the world.

As was mentioned, it’s the size of — going to be the size of 40 football fields — 40 — big enough to fit four Carrier Domes inside and still have space leftover.

Today, I’m pleased to announce we’re building on that commitment with a landmark preliminary agreement between my administration and Micron, a major chip manufacturer, which is building these fabs here in Upstate New York: $6.1 billion in chips funding paired with $125 billion from Micron to build these facilities here in New York and near Micron headquarters in Idaho.

And I — you know, by the way — (applause) — it’s been mentioned before, it’s the single-biggest private investment ever in the history of these two states — Idaho and, you know, New York.

So far from — not far from here, in Clay, New York, it’s going to help build two to four manufacturing facilities planned by Micron’s mega-labs [mega-fabs].

In Boise, Ohio [Idaho], it’s going to help build new high-volume manufacturing fabs as well.

In all, it’s going to create over 70,000 jobs across both states, at least 9,000 of which are construction jobs, 11,000 manufacturing jobs, tens of thousands more up and down the supply chain.  And it includes 9,000 permanent Micron manufacturing jobs right here in Clay — not here, but near, in Clay, just a — just a little bit from here — many of them paying — catch this — $100,000 a year.  And it doesn’t require a college degree.  (Applause.)

These projects are governed by the largest Project Labor Agreement in the state’s history.  It makes one of the — and it makes sure that work is done on time with the highest quality and most significant safety standards.  And I’m pleased that Micron is planning to sit down with unions to discuss the labor piece.

Look — (applause) — that’s not all.  And, by the way, I know I get criticized for being the most pro-union president in American history, but guess what?  The middle class built this country, and unions built the middle class.  (Applause.)

These new — brand new facilities are going to produce the most sophisticated, powerful, leading-edge memory chips in the entire world.  Each one has — has trillions — not billions, not millions — trillions of tiny features, each 4,000 [40,000] times thinner than a single hair on your head.  And I’ve got some very thin hair on my head.  (Laughter.)

They require manufacturing precision down to the size of an atom.  They posse- — they process enormous amounts of information at lightning speed.  And they’re critical to the emerging technology that will power tomorrow’s economy, like artificial intelligence and advanced communications.  They’ll make everyday things faster, lighter, smaller, and more reliable.  And it’s about time.

Even though America invented these advanced chips, we don’t make any of them today — zero, zero.  All manufacturing of leading-edge chips moved to Asia years ago.  

That’s why, today, this is such a big deal.  And it is a big deal. 

We’re bringing advanced chips manufacturing back to America after 40 years.  And it’s going to transform our semiconductor industry, a pillar of a modern economy.  And it’s going to create an entirely new ecosystem in research, design, manufacturing of advanced chips here in America.

Folks, where is it written — when I said we were going to have the lo- — become the manufacturing capital of the world again when I got elected, they looked at me, some of my friends, and said, “You’re crazy.”  Well, where the he- — where the heck is it written — (laughter) — that American manufacturing can- — will not be the capital of the world again?  It’s going to be.

We’ve already created 8- — nearly 800,000 new manufacturing jobs since I took office.  And, fol- — we’re just getting started.  And that’s a fact.  We’re just getting started. 

It isn’t just about investing in America.  It’s about investing in the American people as well.  (Applause.)  And that includes training folks for these high-paying jobs — highly skilled new jobs that we’re creating.  To do that, we’re bringing employers, unions, community colleges, high schools together and workforce hubs where folks can learn the skills hands-on. 

My Jill wi- — my wife, Jill, cares a lot about this as well.  She’s teaching at a community college right now.  Last year, she announced our first five workforce hubs in — in the na- — in the United States in Pittsburgh; Phoenix; Baltimore; Columbus, Ohio; and Augusta, Georgia.  Thousands of workers will be trained in these facilities.  

And today, I’m pleased to announce four new hub programs.  One hub in Detroit and Lansing, Michigan, folks will make electric cars.  Another hub in Philadelphia, one in Milwaukee will train workers that’ll replace every — every poisonous lead pipe in America within the decade.  And here in Syracuse — the Syracuse region, a new hub is going to train semiconductor workers for the future.  (Applause.)

And I know that Micron is also partnering with the American Federation of Teachers to develop a technology curriculum for high schools in New York state.  Think about it, those of you who are as young as me, 40 — in your 40s or so.  (Laughter.)  How many schools still have shop in them?  How many folks have — where you learn how to work with your hands? 

A significant number of public schools did away with it.  So many young people who are qualified and want to and are capable who are going to never know that they had that capacity. 

Well, I want to thank Randi and Sanjay for their work and Micron’s leadership in workforce development, because it’s going to make a big difference.

In all — (applause) — so far, my Investing in America agenda has attracted more than $825 billion — $825 billion in private-sector investment, not a penny of which existed before I got elected.  I ignited a ma- — it ignited a manufacturing boom, a clean-energy boom, a semiconductor boom nationwide.  And it’s clear we have the strongest economy in the world, and that’s a fact.

Fifteen million new jobs created in three and half years.  (Applause.)  Unemployment did — has — hasn’t been this low for this long for 50 years.  Wages are rising.  Instead of importing foreign products, we’re exporting — and exporting American jobs, we’re exporting American products and creating American jobs — (applause) — here in America where they belong.

And, folks, my predecessor and his MAGA Republican friends have a very different view.  They oppose the CHIPS and Science Act that’s powering this growth today. 

In fact, your congressman, Brandon Williams, called it “corporate welfare.” 
  Bless me, Father.  (The President makes the sign of the cross.)  (Laughter.) 

And Elise Stefanik, a few counties over, called the CHIPS Act — she said it was, “Washington at its worst,” end of quote.  I guess they’re not going to be here today to celebrate.  (Laughter and applause.)

But now — now — (applause) — conversion is wonderful, isn’t it? 

Now they’ve seen the massive surge in investment and jobs that we’ve mobilized, and they’re singing a different tune now.  Now they say this is “critical.”  You got that?  Stefanik said this is “critical.”

Now they say what we’re doing will, quote, “lead to a more prosperous, secure, and innovative America.”  Well, there’s nothing, I said, like conversion.  I agree.  Welcome, welcome, welcome.  (Laughter.)

Folks, look, we got to stop this division.  I promised to be a president for all of America, whether you voted for me or not.  Today’s investment helps Americans everywhere, in red states and blue states, and proof that we have — we leave no one behind. 

Of the infrastructure jobs and pr- — and proposals, we have more of them in red states than in blue states.  It’s about America.

Let me close with this.  The past few years, I’ve talked to folks all across America, in their communities and at their kitchen tables.  They often tell me, back in 2020, they were down.  They had lost their business. 

How many — did you know somebody who worked at Carrier or another facility and a whole generation that worked there?  And you’re sitting there as a parent and — a mom — and the kid that comes home, well-educated, says, “I can’t live here anymore.  There’s no job for me.  I got to move.  I got to move.”  They lost faith. 

Syracuse is a good example.  For decades — decades, it was a manufacturing boomtown full of good-paying jobs and a solid path to the middle class.  I know; I lived here.  I went to law school here.  I married a wonderful woman from Lake Skaneateles who I came — that’s why I came to Syracuse Law School.  I felt it. 

But over the years, trickle-down economics swept it all away.  Under my predecessor, manufacturers left.  Factories like BCS Automotive over in Auburn, where her family lived, shut down.  Twenty-two thousand local jobs disappeared in the Syracuse region. 

That’s a story seen in community after community nationwide: hollowed out, robbed of hope.  But not on my watch, thanks to investing we’re making in America and the partnerships we’ve formed.  (Applause.)

American manufacturing is back.  (Applause.)  New factories are going up all across the country.  And communities like Syracuse are writing a great American comeback story — that’s what it is: a comeback story — creating new jobs, new businesses, new hope. 

Today, folks, when folks see shovels in the ground on these projects, people going back to work, I hope they feel the pride that I feel — pride in their hometown that’s making a comeback, pride in America, pride in knowing we can get big things done when we work together.

That’s why I’ve never been more optimistic about this nation’s future.  We just have to remember who we are, for God’s sake.  We’re the United States of America.  (Applause.)  And there is nothing — nothing, nothing — beyond our capacity to get done when we work together.

God bless you all.  And may God protect our troops.

This is a big deal day.  Congratulations, Syracuse.  (Applause.)  Congratulations.



Thank you for taking the time to be here.  Good afternoon.  I’m accompanied by Jeff Zients, who is heading up our whole COVID team.  And today, what I’d like to do is to upgrade — update you on where we are.  Tomorrow, we’re going to begin the briefings that are going to occur on a regular basis with Mr. Zients and his team.  So we’re bringing back the pros to talk about COVID in an unvarnished way.  Any questions you have, that’s how we’ll handle them because we’re letting science speak again. 

And so, I — I’d like to update you on the aggressive steps we’re taking to meet our goal of administering 100 million COVID-19 vaccine shots within — within a hundred days, and to ramp up the vaccine supply as fast as we can.

This will be one of the most difficult operational challenges we’ve ever undertaken as a nation.  I’ve said that before, but I must say it again because we’re going to do — we’re going to do everything we can to get it done.  But a lot of things can go wrong along the way. 

And so, I’ve — as I’ve said in the past, we want to give credit to everyone involved in this vaccine effort and the prior administration and the science community and the medical sphere — (technical equipment falls to the floor) — for getting the program — I didn’t do it, I promise — (laughter) — for getting the program off the ground.  And that credit is absolutely due.

But it’s also no secret that we have recently discovered, in the final days of the transition — and it wasn’t until the final days we got the kind of cooperation we needed — that once we arrived, the vaccine program is worse shape than we anticipated or expected.  A lot of you who follow this — and nobody is — I mean this sincerely, the press is the smartest group of people in town; you hone this stuff down, clearly — I think you found the same thing. 

Even before I took office, I announced a new vaccine — a vaccination strategy which centers on federal leadership and execution for our whole country.  And that’s why I directed my COVID team to go to work immediately, and how we could step up the vaccination efforts and the vaccinations. 

I’m pleased to announce the first progress in that work today on day seven of my presidency.  First, after review of the current vaccine supply manufacturing plants, I can announce that we will increase overall weekly vaccination distribution to states, tribes, and territories from 8.6 million doses to a minimum of 10 million doses, starting next week.  That’s an increase of 1.4 million doses per week. 

And you all know — if I may note, parenthetically — you all know — know that the vaccines are distributed to states based on population.  They’re based on population.  And so the smaller the state, the less vaccine; the bigger the state, the more they get.  And so this is going to allow millions of more Americans to get vaccinated sooner than previously anticipated.  We got a long way to go, though.

The second thing: We’re increasing the transparency with states, cities, and tribes, and local partners when it comes to the vaccine supply.  This is something we’ve heard over and over again from both Democrats and Republicans, state and local leaders: that they need a plan in order to what — they didn’t know what they had to plan on.  They need to know what the order is going to be. 

Jeff had a meeting with the governors on Zoom and — and others.  And I think we’re getting this coordinated in a way that there’s increased cooperation and confidence. 

But until now, we’ve had to guess how much vaccine to expect for the next week.  And that’s what the governors had to do: “How much am I getting next week?”  This is unacceptable.  They — you know, the lives are at stake here. 

From this week forward, God willing, we’ll ensure that states, tribes, and territories will now always have a reliable three-week forecast on what the supply they’re going to get.  So they’ll know, three weeks ahead of time, what’s going to be there in the third week. 

This is going to help make sure governors, mayors, and local leaders have greater certainty around supply so they can carry out their plans to vaccinate as many people as possible.

So, we will both increase the supply in the short term by more than 15 percent and give our states and local partners more certainty about when the deliveries will arrive.  These two steps are going to help increase our prospects of hitting and — or exceeding, God willing, the ambitious goal of 100 million shots in 100 days. 

But I also want to be clear: 100 million shots in 100 days is not the endpoint; it’s just the start.  We’re not stopping there.  The end goal is to beat COVID-19.  And the way we do that is to get more people vaccinated, which means we have to be ready, after we hit the ground [sic] — after we hit the goal of 100 million shots in 100 days. 

Now, that means fewer than 100 million people getting totally vaccinated; it means 100 [million] shots, and it means somewhere between 60 — maybe less, maybe more — million people will have the — because it requires two shots in many cases — not always.

So today, I’m directing COVID-19 Response Coordinator Jeff Zeints, here, to work with the Department of Health and Human Services to increase our total supply of vaccine for the American people.  And we believe that we’ll soon be able to confirm the purchase of an additional 100 billion [million] doses for each of the two FDA-authorized vaccines: Pfizer and Moderna.  That’s 100 million more doses of Pfizer and 100 million more doses of Moderna — 200 million more doses than the federal government had previously secured.  Not in hand yet, but ordered. 

We expect these additional 200 million doses to be delivered this summer.  And some of it will come as early — begin to come in early summer, but by the mid- — by the mid-summer, that this vaccine will be there.  And the order — and that increases the total vaccine order in the United States by 50 percent — from 400 million ordered to 600 million. 

This is enough vaccine to fully vaccinate 300 Americans by the end of the summer, beginning of the fall.  But we want to make — look, that’s — I want to repeat: It’ll be enough to fully vaccinate 300 [million] Americans to beat this pandemic — 300 million Americans.  And this is aggregate plan that doesn’t leave anything on the table or anything to chance, as we’ve seen happen in the past year. 

I’ve said before: This is a wartime effort.  When I say — when I say that, people ask, “Wartime?”  I say, “Yeah, more than 400,000 Americans have already died.”  I think it’s four hundred eleven or twelve [thousand] have died in one year of this pandemic — more than all the people who died in all of — Americans who died in World War Two.  This is a wartime undertaking; it’s not hyperbole. 

And as such, I directed the team to be ready to exercise all the authorities I have under the Defense Production Act, and expedite these vaccines.  And we’re using the Defense Production Act to launch a full-scale, wartime effort to address the supply shortages we inherited from the previous administration.

We’re going to be working across the government, with private industry, to ramp up production of vaccine and protective equipment — the syringes, the needles, the gloves, the swabs, and the masks — everything that’s needed to protect, test, vaccinate, and take care of our people.  Well, we’ve already identified suppliers, and we’re working with them to move our plan forward. 

The biggest problem — I hope you’re all asking me by the end of the summer that, “You have too much vaccine left over.  You have too much equipment leftover.”  That’s not my worry.  I hope that becomes the problem, rather than we somehow find interruptions in supply or access.

These aggressive steps to increase vaccine supply come on top of the steps we took last week to get more people vaccinated for free, to create more places for them to get vaccinated, and to mobilize more medical teams to get shots in people’s arms.

We’ve directed FEMA, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, to stand up the first federally supported community vaccination centers, and that work is underway.  We’re working to make vaccines available to thousands of local pharmacies,
beginning in early February; it’s a couple weeks off.  And we — that will enormously expand our reach.

Last week, I also signed a declaration to immediately begin reimbursing states 100 percent for the uses of their National Guard to help the COVID relief effort, both getting people — getting the sites set up and even using some of their personnel to administer some of the vaccines.  And I think it’s something Democrats and Republicans and governors alike have called for. 

We’re also expanding testing, which will help schools and
businesses reopen safely and protect the most vulnerable.

And we formalized the Health Equity Task Force to ensure that equity is at the core of everything we do in urban and rural communities alike, to make sure those people most significantly damaged have — have access.  Access.  We have to change.  We have move in a direction for those communities that are hard to get to.

But the brutal truth is: It’s going to take months before we can get the majority of Americans vaccinated.  Months.  In the next few months, masks — not vaccines — are the best defense against COVID-19.  Experts say that wearing masks from now just until April would save 50,000 lives who otherwise will pass away if we don’t wear these masks.  That’s why I’m asking the American people to mask up for the first 100 days.  I’ve issued executive orders requiring masks on federal property and
interstate travel — trains and planes and buses.

     One congressman pointed out — I could — well, he used a very, anyway, colorful term to say wearing a mask — “I tell him to kiss my ear; I’m not going to wear a mask.”  Well, guess what?  Not very American.  The fact is, you want to be patriotic; you’re going to protect people.  And new COVID-19 variants are — we are instituting new measures to deal with these individuals flying into the United States from other countries. 

You’ve all hold — if you could hold a second — you’ve all heard about the strain — the British strain, the Brazilian strain, the South African strain.  And they are — they seem to be more transmittable more easily.  So, in addition to wearing masks, everyone flying to the United States from another country, we need to test before they get on that plane and self-quarantine when they arrive in America.

I’m going to close with this: I now have a national — we now have a national strategy to beat COVID-19.  It’s comprehensive.  It’s based on science, not politics.  It’s based on truth, not denial.  And it is detailed.  It’s going to require Congress to pass the American Rescue Plan to provide funding to administer the vaccines, to ramp up testing, to help schools and businesses reopen, and to deliver immediate
economic relief to Americans who are badly in need of it through no fault of their own. 

And our plan will take time.  Progress from our plan will take time to measure, as people getting infected today don’t show up in case counts for weeks, and those who perish from those — from the disease die weeks after that exposure.  You know, despite the best — our best intentions, we’re going to face setbacks, which I will always explain to you and acknowledge. 

And let me be clear: Things are going to continue to get worse before they get better.  The death toll, experts tell us, is likely to top 500,000 by the end of next month — February — and cases will continue to mount.  We didn’t get into this mess overnight, and it’s going to take months for us to turn things around.  But let me be equally clear: We’re going to get through this.  We will defeat this pandemic. 

And to a nation waiting for action, let me be clearest on this point: Help is on the way.  We can do this if we come together, if we listen to the scientists.  And as I said: Tomorrow, I say to the press, the entire team will be back in the business of — my COVID team — of answering all your detailed questions.

So, thank you very much for your patience.  Keep the faith.  We’re going to get this done.  And I’ll always level with you about the state of affairs. 

Good afternoon, folks.  I thank the Vice President for being with me today as well.  In my campaign for President, I made it very clear that the moment had arrived as a nation where we face deep racial inequities in America and system- — systemic racism that has plagued our nation for far, far too long. 

     I said it over the course of the past year that the blinders had been taken come off the nation of the American people.  What ma- — what many Americans didn’t see,
or had simply refused to see, couldn’t be ignored any longer.

Those 8 minutes and 46 seconds that took George Floyd’s life opened the eyes of millions of Americans and millions of people around — all over the world.  It was the knee on the neck of justice, and it wouldn’t be forgotten.  It stirred the conscience of tens of millions of Americans, and, in my view, it marked a turning point in this country’s attitude toward racial justice. 

When his six-years-old — six-year-old daughter, Gianna, who I met with when I met with the family — I leaned down to say hi to her, and she said — looked at me, and she said, “Daddy changed the world.”  That’s what Gianna said — his daughter.  “Daddy changed the world.”  And I believe she is right, not because this kind of injustice stopped — it clearly hasn’t — but because the ground has shifted, because it’s changed minds and mindsets, because it laid the groundwork for progress. 

COVID-19 has further ripped a path of destruction through every community in America, but no one has been spared, but the devastation in communities of color has been nothing short of stunning.  Just look at the numbers: 40 percent of frontline workers — nurses, first responders, grocery store workers — are Americans of color, and many are still living on the edge.  One in ten black Americans is out of work today.  One in eleven Latino Americans is out of work today.  One in seven households in America — about one in four black, one in five Latino households in America — report that they don’t have enough food to eat in the United States of America. 

Black and Latino Americans are dying of COVID-19 at rates nearly three times that of white Americans.  And it’s not white Americans’ fault, but it’s just a fact.  And the Americans now know it, especially younger Americans. 

One of the reasons I’m so optimistic about this nation is that today’s generation of young Americans is the most progressive, thoughtful, inclusive generation that America has ever seen.  And they are pulling us toward justice in so many ways, forcing us to confront the huge gap in economi- — excuse me, economic inequity between those at the top and everyone else, forcing us to confront the existential crisis of climate; and, yes, forcing us to confront systemic racism and white supremacy. 

It’s just been weeks since all of America witnessed a group of thugs, insurrectionists, political extremists, and white supremacists violently attack the Capitol of our democracy.  And so now — now is the time to act.  It’s time to act because that’s what the faith and morality calls us to do.

Across nearly every faith, the same principles hold: We’re all God’s children; we should treat each other as we would like to be treated ourselves.  And this is time to act — and this time to act is because it’s what the core values of this nation call us to do.  And I believe the vast majority of Americans — Democrats, Republicans, and independents — share these values and want us to act as well. 

We have never fully lived up to the founding principles of this nation, to state the obvious, that all people are created equal and have a right to be treated equally throughout their lives.  And it’s time to act now, not only because it’s the right thing to do, but because if we do, we’ll all be better off for it.

For too long, we’ve allowed a narrow, cramped view of the promise of this nation to fester.  You know, we’ve — we’ve bought the view that America is a zero-sum game in many cases: “If you succeed, I fail.”  “If you get ahead, I fall behind.”  “If you get the job, I lose mine.”  Maybe worst of all, “If I hold you down, I lift myself up.” 

We’ve lost sight of what President Kennedy told us when he said, “A rising tide lifts all boats.”  And when we lift each other up, we’re all lifted up.  You know, and the corollary is true as well: When any one of us is held down, we’re all held back.  More and more economic studies in recent years have proven this, but I don’t think you need economic studies to see the truth.

Just imagine if instead of consigning millions of American children to under-resourced schools, we gave each and every three- and four-year-old child a chance to learn, to go to school — not daycare, school — and grow and thrive in school and throughout.  When they’ve done that — the places it’s been done, it shows they have an exponentially greater chance of going all the way through 12 years of school and doing it well.

But, you know, does anyone — does anyone in this whole nation think we’re not all better off if that were to happen? 

Just imagine if instead of denying millions of Americans the ability to own a home and build generational wealth — who made it possible for them buy a home, their first home — and begin to build equity to provide for their families and send their children off to school, does anyone doubt that the whole nation will be better off? 

Just imagine: Instead of denying millions of young entrepreneurs the ability to access capital, we made it possible to take their dream to market, create jobs, reinvest in their own communities.  Does anyone doubt this whole nation wouldn’t be better off?

Just imagine if more incredibly creative and innovative — how much more creative and innovative we’d be if this nation held — held the historic black colleges and universities to the same opportunities — and minority-serving institutions — that had the same funding and resources of public universities to compete for jobs and industries of the future.  You know, just ask the first HBCU graduate elected as Vice President if that’s not true. 

But to do this, I believe this nation and this government need to change their whole approach to the issue of racial equal- — equity.  Yes, we need criminal justice reform, but that isn’t nearly enough.  We need to open the promise of America to every American.  And that means we need to make the issue of racial equity not just an issue for any one department of government; it has to be the business of the whole of government. 

That’s why I issued, among the first days, my whole-of-government executive order that will, for the first time, advance equity for all throughout our federal policies and institutions.  It focuses on the full range of communities who have been long underserved and overlooked: people of color; Americans with disabilities; LGBTQ Americans; religious minorities; rural, urban, suburban communities facing persistent poverty. 

And I’ve asked Ambassador Susan Rice to lead the administration’s charge through the White House and Domestic Policy Council because I know she’ll see it through.  Every White House, every White House component, and every agency will be involved in this work because advancing equity has to be everyone’s job. 

Today, I’ll be shortly signing an additional package of executive actions to continue this vital work.  Housing, for example: Housing is a right in America, and homeownership is an essential tool to wealth creation and to be passed down to generations. 

Today, I’m directing the Department of Housing and Urban Affairs — and Urban Development to redress historical racism in federal housing policies.  Today, I’m directing the federal agency to reinvigorate the consultation process with Indian tribes.  Respect the tribal sovereignty — respect for tribal sovereignty will be a cornerstone of our engaging with Native American communities. 

This builds on the work we did last week to expand tribes’ access to the Strategic National Stockpile for the first time, to ensure they receive help from the Federal Emergency Management Agency, FEMA, to fight this pandemic. 

Today, I’m directing federal agencies to combat resurgence of xenophobia, particularly against Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders, that we’ve seen skyrocket during this pandemic.  This is unacceptable and it’s un-American.  I’ve asked the Department of Justice to strengthen its partnership with the Asian American and Pacific Islander community to prevent those hate crimes.

I’ve also asked the Department of Health and Human Services to put out best practices for combatting xenophobia in our national response to COVID.

Look, in the weeks ahead, I’ll be reaffirming the federal government’s commitment to diversity, equity, and inclusion and accessibility, building on the work we started in the Obama-Biden administration.  That’s why I rescinded the previous administration’s harmful ban on diversity and sensitivity training, and abolished the offensive, counter-factual 1776 Commission.  Unity and healing must begin with understanding and truth, not ignorance and lies.

Today, I’m also issuing an executive order that will ultimately end the Justice Department’s use of the private prison indus- — private prisons, an industry that houses pretrial detrainees [sic] — detainees and federal prisoners. 

The executive order directs the Attorney General to decline to renew contracts with privately operated criminal facilities — a step we started to take at the end of the Obama administration and was reversed under the previous administration.

This is the first step to stop corporations from profiteering off of incarcerating — incarceration that is less humane and less safe, as the studies show.  And it is just the beginning of my administration’s plan to address systemic problems in our criminal justice system.

Here’s another thing that we need to do: We need to restore and expand the Voting Rights Act — named after our dear friend, John Lewis — and continue to fight back against laws that many states are engaged in to suppress the right to vote, while expanding access to the ballot box for all eligible voters.

Because here’s the deal, and I’ll close with this: I ran for President because I believe we’re in a battle for the soul of this nation.  And the simple truth is, our soul will be troubled as long as systemic racism is allowed to persist.  We can’t eliminate it if — it’s not going to be overnight.  We can’t eliminate everything. 

But it’s corrosive, it’s destructive, and it’s costly.  It costs every American, not just who have felt the sting of racial injustice.  We aren’t just less of a — we are not just a nation of morally deprived because of systemic racism; we’re also less prosperous, we’re less successful, we’re less secure. 

So, we must change, and I know it’s going to take time.  But I know we can do it.  And I firmly believe the nation is ready to change, but government has to change as well.  We need to make equity and justice part of what we do every day — today, tomorrow, and every day.

Now I’m going to sign these executive actions to continue the work to make real the promise of America for every American.  Again, I’m not promising we can end it tomorrow, but I promise you: We’re going to continue to make progress to eliminate systemic racism, and every branch of the White House and the federal government is going to be part of that effort.

Thank you.

This first executive order is a memorandum for the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development to redress our nation’s and the federal government’s history of discriminatory housing practices and policies.

The next executive order is reforming the incarceration system by eliminating the use of privately operated criminal detention facilities.
The third executive order is a memorandum for the heads of executive departments and agencies on tribal consultation, and strengthening nation-to-nation relationships.
The last executive order is condemning and combatting racism, xenophobia, and intolerance against Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders in the United States.
I think the country is ready, and I know this administration is ready.  Thank you.


Good afternoon, folks.  I’m going to make some brief remarks, sign an executive order, and then take your questions, if that’s okay with you all.

     Last week, we immediately got to work to contain the pandemic and deliver economic relief to millions of Americans who need it the most.  And today we’re getting to work to rebuild the backbone of America: manufacturing, unions, and the middle class. 

It’s based on a simple premise: that we’ll reward work, not wealth, in this country.  And the key plank of ensuring the future will be “Made in America.”  I’ve long said that I don’t accept the defeatist view that the forces of automation and globalization can’t keep — can keep union jobs from growing here in America.  We can create more of them, not fewer of them. 

I don’t buy for one second the — that the vitality of the American manufacturing is a thing of the past.  American manufacturing was the arsenal of democracy in World War Two, and it must be part of the engine of American prosperity now.  That means we are going to use taxpayers’ money to rebuild America.  We’ll buy American products and support American jobs, union jobs. 

For example, the federal government every year spends approximately $600 billion in government procurement to keep the country going safe and secure.  And there’s a law that’s been on the books for almost a century now: to make sure that that money was spent — taxpayers’ dollars for procurement is spent to support American jobs and American businesses.

But the previous administration didn’t take it seriously enough.  Federal agencies waived the Buy American requirement without much pushback at all.  Big corporations and special interests have long fought for loopholes to redirect American taxpayers’ dollars to foreign companies where the products are being made.  The result: tens of billions of American taxpayers’ dollars supporting foreign jobs and foreign industries.

In 1918 — excuse me, in 2018 alone, the Department spent $3 billion — the Defense Department — on foreign construction contracts, leaving American steel and iron out in the cold.  It spent nearly $300 million in foreign engines and on vehicles instead of buying American vehicles and engines from American companies, putting Americans to work.

Under the previous administration, the federal government contract awarded directly to foreign companies went up 30 percent.  That is going to change on our watch. 

Today I’m taking the first steps in my larger Build Back Better Recovery Plan that invests in American workers, unions, and businesses up and down the supply chain.  And I know that previous presidents entered office by promising to buy America and instituting the Buy American policy, but here’s why this is different and not the same:

I’ll be signing an executive order in just a moment, tightening the existing Buy American policies, and go further.  We’re setting clear directives and clear explanations.  We’re going to get to the core issue with a centralized, coordinated effort.

Look, today I’m creating a director of Made in America at the White House Office of Management and Budget who will oversee our all-of-government Made in America initiative.  That starts with stopping federal agencies from waiving Buy American requirements with impunity, as has been going on.  If an agency wants to issue a waiver to say “We’re not going to buy an American product as part of this project; we’re going to buy a foreign product,” they have to come to the White House and explain it to us. 

We’re going to require that waivers be publicly posted; that is, if someone is seeking a waiver to build this particular vehicle or facility and is going to buy the following foreign parts, that waiver — the request for it — is going to be posted.  Then we’ll work with small American manufacturers and businesses to give them a shot to raise their hand and say, “Yeah, I can do that here in my shop, in my town.”

It’s about — as you’ve heard me say before, I used to have a friend who was a great athlete, who’d say, “You got to know how to know.”  These small businesses don’t even know they can compete for making the product that is attempting to be waived and being able to be bought abroad.

And I’m directing the Office of Management and Budget to review waivers to make sure they are only used in very limited circumstances.  For example, when there’s an overwhelming national security, humanitarian, or emergency need here in America.  This hasn’t happened before. It will happen now.

Here’s what else we’re going to be doing.  Under the Build Back Better Recovery Plan, we’ll invest hundreds of billions of dollars in buying American products and materials to modernize our infrastructure, and our competitive strength will increase in a competitive world.  That means millions of good-paying jobs, using American-made steel and technology, to rebuild our roads, our bridges, our ports, and to make them more climate resilient, as well as making them able to move faster and cheaper and cleaner to transport American-made goods across the country and around the world, making us more competitive.
It also means replenishing our stockpiles to enhance our national security.  As this pandemic has made clear, we can never again be in a position where we have to rely on a foreign country that doesn’t share our interest in order to protect our people during a national emergency.  We need to make our own protective equipment, essential products and supplies.  And we’ll work with our allies to make sure they have resilient supply chains as well. 
We’ll also make historic investments in research and development — hundreds of billions of dollars — to sharpen America’s innovative edge in markets where global leadership is up for grabs — markets like battery technology, artificial intelligence, biotechnology, clean energy. 
The federal government also owns an enormous fleet of vehicles, which we’re going to replace with clean, electric vehicles made right here in America by American workers, creating millions of jobs — a million autoworker jobs in clean energy — and vehicles that are net-zero emissions.
And together, this will be the largest mobilization of public investment in procurement, infrastructure, and R&D since World War Two. 
And with the executive order I’ll be signing today, we’ll increase Buy American requirements for these kinds of projects and improve the way we measure domestic content requirements.  For example, right now, if you manufacture a vehicle for the federal government, you need to show that at least 50 percent of the components of that vehicle were made in America.  But because of loopholes that have been expanded over time, you can count the least valuable possible parts as part of that 50 percent to say “Made in America,” while the most valuable parts — the engines, the steel, the glass, the manufac- — are manufactured abroad. 
So basically — but basically we’re batting zero for two.  The content threshold of 50 percent aren’t high enough.  And the way we measure the content doesn’t account for U.S. jobs and economic activity.  We’re going to change that as well.
The executive action I’m signing today will not only require that companies make more of their components in America, but that the value of those components is contributing to our economy, measured by things like a number of American jobs created and/or supported. 
At the same time, we’ll be committed to working with our trading partners to modernize international trade rules, including those relating to government procurement, to make sure we can use — we can all use our taxpayer dollars to spur investment that promotes growth and resilient supply chains.
And here’s what else the action does.  When we buy America, we’ll buy from all of America.  That includes communities that have historically been left out of government procurement — black, brown, Native American small businesses and entrepreneurs in every region of the country. 
We will use a national network of manufacturers — called a Manufacturing Extension Partnership — that’s in all 50 states and Puerto Rico, to help government agency connect with new domestic suppliers across the country. 
This is a critical piece of building our economy back better and including everyone in the deal this time, especially small businesses that are badly hurting in this economy.

The executive action I am taking also reiterates my strong support for the Jones Act and American vessels, you know, and our ports, especially those important for America’s clean energy future and the development of offshore renewable energy.

I’ll close with this: The reason we need to do this is America can’t sit on the sidelines in the race for the future.
Our competitors aren’t waiting.  To ensure the future is made in America, we need to win not just the jobs of today, but the jobs and industries of tomorrow.  And we know that the middle class built this country, and we also know unions built the middle class.  So let’s invest in them once again.  I know we’re ready, despite all of the — all we’re facing.  I have never been more optimistic about the future of America than I am today.

Given even just half a chance, the American people,
the American worker, has never, ever let the country down.  Imagine if we give them a full chance.  That’s what we’re going to do.

I’ll stop here and sign the executive order, and then come back and take some of your questions.

This executive order is entitled “Ensuring the Future Is Made in America, by Americans — All of American Workers.”

Thank you for your patience.  We had a very good but long meeting with the chairpersons of the House of Representatives in the Oval, and it went a little longer, but it went very well.  Thank you all for being here.

I’m accompanied by the Vice President and the Secretary of Treasury, Janet Yellen, and I want to talk today about our plan. 

And the January jobs numbers came out today.  And while we are grateful for everyone who found work and is earning a paycheck, it is very clear our economy is still in trouble.  We added just 6,000 private sector jobs in the country last month.  Overall, we added 49,000 jobs.  And this at a time when we have more than 10 million people out of work, 4 million people have been out of work for six months or longer, and 2.5 million women have been driven from the workforce.  Fifteen million Americans are behind in their rental payments.  Twenty-four million adults and twelve million children literally don’t have enough food to eat.

These aren’t Democrats or Republicans — they’re Americans.  And they’re suffering.  And they’re suffering not because of anything they did.  Through no fault of their own, they’re suffering.  A once-in-a-century virus has decimated our economy, and it’s still wreaking havoc on our economy today.  And so much of it is still about the virus.  We’re still in the teeth of this pandemic.  In fact, January was the single deadliest month of the whole pandemic.  We lost nearly 100,000 lives.

I know some in Congress think we’ve already done enough to deal with the crisis in the country.  Others think that things are getting better and we can afford to sit back and either do a little or do nothing at all.  That’s not what I see.  I see enormous pain this country.  A lot of folks out of work.  A lot of folks going hungry, staring at the ceiling at night wondering, “What am I going to do tomorrow?”  A lot of folks trying to figure out how to keep their jobs and take care of their children.  A lot of folks reaching the breaking point. 

Suicides are up.  Mental health needs are increasing.  Violence against women and children is increasing.  A lot of folks are losing hope.  And I believe the American people are looking right now to their government for help, to do our job, to not to let them down.  So I’m going to act, and I’m going to act fast.

I’d like to be — I’d like to be doing it with the support of Republicans.  I’ve met with Republicans.  There’s some really fine people who want to get something done, but they’re just not willing to go as far as I think we have to go. 

I’ve told both Republicans and Democrats that’s my preference: to work together.  But if I have to choose between getting help right now to Americans who are hurting so badly and getting bogged down in a lengthy negotiation or compromising on a bill that’s — that’s up to the crisis, that’s an easy choice.  I’m going to help the American people who are hurting now. 

That’s why I’m so grateful to the House and Senate for moving so fast on the American Rescue Plan.  Here’s what’s in that plan:

First, it puts $160 billion into our national COVID-19 strategy, which includes more money for manufacturing, distribution, and setting up of vaccination sites — everything that’s needed to get vaccines into people’s arms.  There is simply nothing more important than us getting the resources we need to vaccinate the people in this country as soon, as quickly as possible.  So, job number one of the American Rescue Plan is vaccines.  Vaccines.

The second, the American Rescue Plan is going to keep the commitment of $2,000: $600 has already gone out; $1,400 checks to people who need it.  This is money directly in people’s pockets.  They need it.  We need to target that money.  So, folks making $300,000 don’t get any windfall.  But if you’re a two — if you’re a two — if you’re a family that’s a two-wage earner, each of the parents — one making 30 grand and one making 40 or 50 — maybe that’s a little more than — well, yeah, they need the money, and they’re going to get it.

And here’s what I won’t do: I’m not cutting the size of the checks.  They’re going to be $1,400.  Period.  That’s what the American people were promised.

And very quickly, here’s the rest of my plan:

It has money for food and nutrition so that folks don’t go hungry.  I think our Republican friends are going to support that.  It extends unemployment insurance, which is going to run out on March 13th of this year, to the end of September of this year, because there is still going to be — we’re still going to have high unemployment. 

It helps small businesses, thousands of whom have had to go out of business. 

It has money to help folks pay their health insurance.

It has rental assistance to keep people in their homes, rather than being thrown out in the street.

It’s got money to help us open our schools safely.

It has money for childcare, for paid leave. 

It gets needed resources to state and local governments to prevent layoffs of essential personnel — firefighters, nurses, folks that are schoolteachers, sanitation workers.

It raises the minimum wage. 

It’s big, and it’s bold.  And it’s a real answer to the crisis we’re in. 

And it’s one more thing.  And I want to say it very clearly on this — be very clear on this point: It’s better economics. It not only addresses the immediate crisis we’re in, it’s better for the long-term economic health of our nation and our competitiveness. 

My plan creates more jobs, it creates more economic growth, and does more to make us competitive with the rest of the world than any other plan.  Don’t take my word for it.  Just look at what leading economists across the nation have said — and the world, and across the ocean have said. 

Wall Street investment firm, Moody’s, says if we pass the American Rescue Plan, it will lead to 4 million more jobs than otherwise would be created.  The nonpartisan Brookings Institution has looked at the Rescue — American Rescue Plan and said the GDP of — will reach pre-pandemic projections by 2021, meaning we’ll have recovered by the end of 2021.  And much sooner, by the way, than if we do nothing.

Look, just this week, the Congressional Budget Office projected that if we don’t take action, it would take until the year 2025 to return to full employment. 

There’s also a growing chorus of top economists — right, center, and left — that say we should be less focused on the deficit and more focused on the investments we make, and can make now, in jobs, keeping families out of poverty, and preventing long-term economic damage to our nation.

The simple truth is, if we make these investments now, with interest rates at historic lows, we’ll generate more growth, higher incomes, a stronger economy, and our nation’s finances will be in a stronger position as well.  And the payoff won’t just be in jobs but in our global competitiveness as well — because we’ll be regaining our economic strength faster.

So, the way I see it: The biggest risk is not going too big, if we go — it’s if we go too small.  We’ve been here before.  When this nation hit the Great Recession that Barack and I inherited in 2009, I was asked to lead the effort on the economic Recovery Act to get it passed.  It was a big recovery package, roughly $800 billion.  I did everything I could to get it passed, including getting three Republicans to change their votes and vote for it. 

But it wasn’t enough.  It wasn’t quite big enough.  It stemmed the crisis, but the recovery could have been faster and even bigger.  Today, we need an answer that meets the challenge of this crisis, not one that falls short.  And that’s the issue facing the country right now. 

What Republicans have proposed is either to do nothing or not enough.  All of a sudden, many of them have rediscovered fiscal restraint and the concern for the deficits.  But don’t kid yourself — this approach will come with a cost: more pain for more people, for longer than it has to be.

Secretary Yellen talks about the scarring effect that comes with prolonged economic pain.  We see that scarring effect in economic data.  But more important, we can see it in the lives of people living with long-term unemployment, living in hunger, at wits’ end over how to keep their jobs and take care of their kids.

And then she talks about the need to alleviate long-term suffering in the economy.  We can do that.  We don’t have to wait until 2025 to get back to full employment, which will be the case if we don’t do this.

Again, independent analysis from places like

Moody’s, on Wall Street, the Brookings Institution — the American Rescue Plan could achieve that by the beginning — full employment by the beginning of next year.

So, to me, this is — this is what this moment comes down to.  Are we going to pass a big enough package to vaccinate people, to get people back to work, to alleviate the suffering in this country this year?  That’s what I want to do.  Or are we going to say to millions of Americans who are out of work — many of whom have been out of work for six months or longer, who have been scarred by this economic and public health crisis — “Don’t worry, hang on.  Things are going to get better.  We’re going to go smaller, so it’s just going to take us a lot longer”?  Like, until 2025.  That’s the Republican answer right now.

I can’t in good conscience do that.  Too many people in the nation have already suffered for too long through this pandemic and economic crisis.  And telling them we don’t have the money to alleviate their suffering, to get to full employment sooner, to vaccinate America after $8 trillion in deficit spending over the past four years — much of it having gone to the wealthiest people in the country — is neither true nor necessary.

We do have the resources to get to full employment sooner.  We do have the tools to reduce a lot of suffering in this country.  We just have to choose to use them.

So it’s time to act.  We can reduce suffering in this country.  We can put people back to work.  We can control — gain control of this virus.  That’s what the American Rescue Plan does.  And that’s what I’m determined to do, and that’s what I hope we’re going to be able to do in the near term.

So may God bless you all.  May God protect our troops.  And I truly believe real help is on the way.  Thank you all so very much.  Thank you.


 Mr. Secretary, it’s great to be here with you.  And I’ve been looking forward a long time to be able to call you “Mr. Secretary.”  

Good afternoon, everyone.  It’s an honor to be back at the State Department under the eyes of the first American chief diplomat, Benjamin Franklin.  

And, by the way, I want you all to know in the press I was the Benjamin Franklin Professor of Presidential Politics at Penn.  And I thought they did that because I was as old as he was, but I guess not.  

Anyway, all kidding aside, it’s great to be here and stand alongside our most recent and senior diplomat, Secretary Tony Blinken.  Mr. Secretary, thank you for welcoming us today.  We’ve worked together for over 20 years. Your diplomatic skills are respected equally by your friends and our competitors around the world.

And they know when you speak, you speak for me.  And so — so is the message I want the world to hear today: America is back.  America is back.  Diplomacy is back at the center of our foreign policy.

As I said in my inaugural address, we will repair our alliances and engage with the world once again, not to meet yesterday’s challenges, but today’s and tomorrow’s.  American leadership must meet this new moment of advancing authoritarianism, including the growing ambitions of China to rival the United States and the determination of Russia to damage and disrupt our democracy.  

We must meet the new moment accelerating glo- — accelerating global challenges — from the pandemic to the climate crisis to nuclear proliferation — challenging the will only to be solved by nations working together and in common.  We can’t do it alone.  

That must be this — we must start with diplomacy rooted in America’s most cherished democratic values: defending freedom, championing opportunity, upholding universal rights, respecting the rule of law, and treating every person with dignity.

That’s the grounding wire of our global policy — our global power.  That’s our inexhaustible source of strength.  That’s America’s abiding advantage.

Though many of these values have come under intense pressure in recent years, even pushed to the brink in the last few weeks, the American people are going to emerge from this moment stronger, more determined, and better equipped to unite the world in fighting to defend democracy, because we have fought for it ourselves.

Over the past few days, we’ve been in close cooperation with our allies and partners to bring together the international community to address the military coup in Burma.

I’ve also been in touch with Leader McConnell to discuss our shared concerns about the situation in Burma, and we are united in our resolve.  

There can be no doubt: In a democracy, force should never seek to overrule the will of the people or attempt to erase the outcome of a credible election.  

The Burmese military should relinquish power they have seized, release the advocates and activists and officials they have detained, lift the restrictions on telecommunications, and refrain from violence.

As I said earlier this week, we will work with our partners to support restoration of democracy and the rule of law, and impose consequences on those responsible.

Over the past two weeks, I’ve spoken with the leaders of many of our closest friends — Canada, Mexico, the UK, Germany, France, NATO, Japan, South Korea, Australia — to being [begin] reforming the habits of cooperation and rebuilding the muscle of democratic alliances that have atrophied over the past few years of neglect and, I would argue, abuse.

America’s alliances are our greatest asset, and leading with diplomacy means standing shoulder-to-shoulder with our allies and key partners once again.

By leading with diplomacy, we must also mean engaging our adversaries and our competitors diplomatically, where it’s in our interest, and advance the security of the American people.

That’s why, yesterday, the United States and Russia agreed to extend the New START Treaty for five years to preserve the only remaining treaty between our countries safeguarding nuclear stability.

At the same time, I made it clear to President Putin, in a manner very different from my predecessor, that the days of the United States rolling over in the face of Russia’s aggressive actions — interfering with our elections, cyberattacks, poisoning its citizens — are over.  We will not hesitate to raise the cost on Russia and defend our vital interests and our people.  And we will be more effective in dealing with Russia when we work in coalition and coordination with other like-minded partners.

The politically motivated jailing of Alexei Navalny and the Russian efforts to suppress freedom of expression and peaceful assembly are a matter of deep concern to us and the international community.  

Mr. Navalny, like all Russian citizens, is entitled to his rights under the Russian constitution.  He’s been targeted — targeted for exposing corruption.  He should be released immediately and without condition.

And we’ll also take on directly the challenges posed by our prosperity, security, and democratic values by our most serious competitor, China.  

We’ll confront China’s economic abuses; counter its aggressive, coercive action; to push back on China’s attack on human rights, intellectual property, and global governance.

But we are ready to work with Beijing when it’s in America’s interest to do so.  We will compete from a position of strength by building back better at home, working with our allies and partners, renewing our role in international institutions, and reclaiming our credibility and moral authority, much of which has been lost.

That’s why we’ve moved quickly to begin restoring American engagement internationally and earn back our leadership position, to catalyze global action on shared challenges.

On day one, I signed the paperwork to rejoin the Paris Climate Agreement.  We’re taking steps led by the example of integrating climate objectives across all of our diplomacy and raise the ambition of our climate targets.  That way, we can challenge other nations, other major emitters, up to — to up the ante on their own commitments.  I’ll be hosting climate leaders — a climate leaders’ summit to address the climate crisis on Earth Day of this year.  

America must lead in the face of this existential threat.  And just as with the pandemic, it requires global cooperation.  

We’ve also reengaged with the World Health Organization.  That way, we can build better global preparedness to counter COVID-19, as well as detect and prevent future pandemics, because there will be more.  

We’ve elevated the status of cyber issues within our government, including appointing the first national — Deputy National Security Advisor for Cyber and Emerging Technology.  We’re launching an urgent initiative to improve our capability, readiness, and resilience in cyberspace.  

Today, I’m announcing additional steps to course-correct our foreign policy and better unite our democratic values with our diplomatic leadership.  

To begin, Defense Secretary Austin will be leading a Global Posture Review of our forces so that our military footprint is appropriately aligned with our foreign policy and national security priorities.  It will be coordinated across all elements of our national security, with Secretary Austin and Secretary Blinken working in close cooperation.  

And while this review is taking place, we’ll be stopping any planned troop withdrawals from Germany.  We’re also stepping up our diplomacy to end the war in Yemen — a war which has created a humanitarian and strategic catastrophe.  I’ve asked my Middle East team to ensure our support for the United Nations-led initiative to impose a ceasefire, open humanitarian channels, and restore long-dormant peace talks. 

This morning, Secretary Blinken appointed Tim Lenderking, a career foreign policy officer, as our special envoy to the Yemen conflict.  And I appreciate his doing this.  Tim is a life — has lifelong experience in the region, and he’ll work with the U.N. envoy and all parties of the conflict to push for a diplomatic resolution.  

And Tim’s diplomacy will be bolstered by USI- — USAID, working to ensure that humanitarian aid is reaching the Yemeni people who are suffering un- — an undurable [sic] — unendurable devastation.  This war has to end.  

And to underscore our commitment, we are ending all American support for offensive operations in the war in Yemen, including relevant arms sales.  

At the same time, Saudi Arabia faces missile attacks, UAV strikes, and other threats from Iranian-supplied forces in multiple countries.  We’re going to continue to support and help Saudi Arabia defend its sovereignty and its territorial integrity and its people.  

We also face a crisis of more than 80 million displaced people suffering all around the world.  The United States’ moral leadership on refugee issues was a point of bipartisan consensus for so many decades when I first got here.  We shined the light of lamp on — of liberty on oppressed people.  We offered safe havens for those fleeing violence or persecution.  And our example pushed other nations to open wide their doors as well.  

So today, I’m approving an executive order to begin the hard work of restoring our refugee admissions program to help meet the unprecedented global need.  It’s going to take time to rebuild what has been so badly damaged, but that’s precisely what we’re going to do. 

This executive order will position us to be able to raise the refugee admissions back up to 125,000 persons for the first full fiscal year of the Biden-Harris administration.  And I’m directing the State Department to consult with Congress about making a down payment on that commitment as soon as possible.  

And to further repair our moral leadership, I’m also issuing a presidential memo to agencies to reinvigorate our leadership on the LGBTQI issues and do it internationally.  You know, we’ll ensure diplomacy and foreign assistance are working to promote the rights of those individuals, included by combatting criminalization and protecting LGBTQ refugees and asylum-seekers. 

And finally, to successfully reassert our diplomacy and keep Americans safe, prosperous, and free, we must restore the health and morale of our foreign policy institutions.  

I want the people who work in this building and our embassies and consulates around the world to know: I value your expertise and I respect you, and I will have your back.  This administration is going to empower you to do your jobs, not target or politicize you.  We want a rigorous debate that brings all perspectives and makes room for dissent.  That’s how we’ll get the best possible policy outcomes. 

So, with your help, the United States will again lead not just by the example of our power but the power of our example.  

That’s why my administration has already taken the important step to live our domestic values at home — our democratic values at home.  

Within hours of taking office, I signed an executive order overturning the hateful, discriminatory Muslim ban; reversed the ban on transgender individuals serving in our military.  

And as part of our commitment to truth, transparency, and accountability, we stated on day one — we started on day one with daily briefings of the press from the White House.  We’ve reinstate- — we’ve reinstituted regular briefings here at State and at the Pentagon.  We believe a free press isn’t an adversary; rather, it’s essential.  A free press is essential to the health of a democracy.

We’ve restored our commitment to science and to create policies grounded in facts and evidence.  I suspect Ben Franklin would approve. 

We’ve taken steps to acknowledge and address systemic racism and the scourge of white supremacy in our own country.  Racial equity will not just be an issue for one department in our administration, it has to be the business of the whole of government in all our federal policies and institutions. 

All this matters to foreign policy, because when we host the Summit of Democracy early in my administration to rally the nations of the world to defend democracy globally, to push back the authoritarianism’s advance, we’ll be a much more credible partner because of these efforts to shore up our own foundations. 

There’s no longer a bright line between foreign and domestic policy.  Every action we take in our conduct abroad, we must take with American working families in mind.  Advancing a foreign policy for the middle class demands urgent focus on our domestic econog- — economic renewal.

And that’s why I immediately put forth the American Rescue Plan to pull us out of this economic crisis.  That’s why I signed an executive order strengthening our Buy American policies last week.  And it’s also why I’ll work with Congress to make far-reaching investments in research and development of transformable — in transformable technologies.

These investments are going to create jobs, maintain America’s competitive edge globally, and ensure all Americans share in the dividends. 

If we invest in ourselves and our people, if we fight to ensure that American businesses are positioned to compete and win on the global stage, if the rules of international trade aren’t stacked against us, if our workers and intellectual property are protected, then there’s no country on Earth — not China or any other country on Earth — that can match us.

Investing in our diplomacy isn’t something we do just because it’s the right thing to do for the world.  We do it in order to live in peace, security, and prosperity.  We do it because it’s in our own naked self-interest.  When we strengthen our alliances, we amplify our power as well as our ability to disrupt threats before they can reach our shores.  

When we invest in economic development of countries, we create new markets for our products and reduce the likelihood of instability, violence, and mass migrations.  

When we strengthen health systems in far regions of the world, we reduce the risk of future pandemics that can threaten our people and our economy.  

When we defend equal rights of people the world over — of women and girls, LGBTQ individuals, indigenous communities, and people with disabilities, the people of every ethnic background and religion — we also ensure that those rights are protected for our own children here in America. 

America cannot afford to be absent any longer on the world stage.  I come today to the State Department, an agency as old and as storied as the nation itself, because diplomacy has always been essential to how American — America writes its own destiny.

For the diplomacy of Ben Franklin helped assure the success of our revolution.  The vision of the Marshall Plan helped prevent the world from foundering on the wreckage of war.  And the passions of Eleanor Roosevelt declared the audacious idea of universal rights that belong to all.

The leadership of diplomats of every stripe, doing the daily work of engagement, created the very idea of a free and interconnected world.  We are a country that does big things.  American diplomacy makes it happen.  And our administration is ready to take up the mantle and lead once again.  

Thank you all.  And may God bless you and protect our troops, our diplomats, and our development experts, and all Americans serving in harm’s way.  

Going this way.  Thank you all.  

Thank you for being here on short notice.  I’m going to be very brief, but I — because the Vice President and I are heading over the Pentagon for an extensive briefing and to make some comments, as we did at the State Department.  So I’m going to be going from here to there, and you’ll get me there as well.

I want to say good afternoon, everyone.  I wanted to give you an update on the latest regarding our response to the military coup in Burma.

As you know, the assault on Burma’s transition to democracy remains an issue of deep bipartisan concern.  We’ve consulted at length, for example, with Senator McConnell, who’s had a very keen interest in this, and his team.  And we welcomed their helpful insights.

We’ve also been in close contact with our allies and partners around the world, particularly in the Indo-Pacific region, driving vigorous diplomatic outreach to help coordinate an international response to what happened.  

A strong and unified message emerging from the United States has been essential, in our view, to encouraging other countries to join us in pressing for an immediate return to democracy. 

Last week, the United States helped bring together the U.N. Security Council, which issued a strong statement in support of Burmese democracy.  And this week, we will use our renewed engagement on the Human Rights Council to strengthen the world’s commitment to human rights in Burma.

Today, I again call on the Burmese military to immediately release the democratic political leaders and activists and — that they’re now detaining, including Aung San Suu Kyi.  And she is — and also Win Myint, the President.

The military must relinquish the power it seized and demonstrate respect for the will of the people of Burma as expressed in their November 8th election.

So today, I’m announcing a series — a series of actions that we’re taking to begin imposing consequences on the leaders of the coup.  The U.S. government is taking steps to prevent the generals from improperly having access to the $1 billion in Burmese government funds held in the United States.

And today, I’ve approved a new executive order — (coughs) — excuse me — a new executive order enabling us to immediately sanction the military leaders who directed the coup, their business interests, as well as close family members.

We will identify a first round of targets this week.  And we’re also going to impose strong export controls.  And we’re freezing U.S. assets that benefit the Burmese government, while maintaining our support for healthcare, civil society groups, and other areas that benefit the people of Burma directly.

And, finally, as protests grow, violence against those asserting their democratic rights is unacceptable, and we’re going to keep calling it out.  The people of Burma are making their voices heard.  And the world is watching.

We’ll be ready to impose additional measures, and we’ll continue to work with our international partners to urge other nations to join us in these efforts.

So I thank you all.  I wanted to have that statement before I got in the vehicle to go out to the Pentagon.  And I’m sure I’ll see some of you at the Pentagon.  Thanks for coming over on such short notice.  Thank you.

 Good afternoon.  I just had an opportunity to catch up with two small-business owners I met on the road in the last couple weeks.  And the first was a very entrepreneurial woman named Pilar Guzman Zavala, and she’s in Florida, Miami.  And Tim Eichinger, who is in Wisconsin.  They have different businesses and live in different places, but both shared the same message with me when I spoke to them on the road, and that was American small businesses are hurting and hurting badly, and they need help now.  And it’s in all of our interests to make sure they get the help now.

Small businesses are the engines of our economic progress; they’re the glue and the heart and soul of our communities.  But they’re getting crushed.  Since the beginning of this pandemic, 400,000 small businesses have closed — 400,000 — and millions more are hanging by a thread.

It’s hurting black, Latino, and Asian American communities the hardest.  Walk down any Main Street and you see it: empty storefronts, goodbye signs hanging in the windows.  Maybe it’s the pizza place you used to take your family to dinner, or the hardware store that always had the tool you needed.  It’s mom-and-pop shop that’s sponsored by — that is supported by the community, and then, in turn, they support the community.  They sponsor a Little League team; the barber shop with the first dollar bill that he or she earned is still taped to the wall, along with a picture of the kids who are now in college. 

These small businesses — not the ones with 500 employees, but these small businesses that, with a handful of folks, they are 90 percent of the businesses in America.  But when the Paycheck Protection Program was passed, a lot of these mom-and-pop business just got muscled out of the way by bigger companies who jumped in front of the line.

And I want to be clear: The Paycheck Protection Program is a bipartisan effort; Democrats and Republicans helped pass it.  But Democrats and Republicans have also voiced concerns about improving it.  With their input, that’s what we’re doing in our administration: improving it.

In the last month, we’ve increased the share of funding for small businesses with fewer than 10 employees by nearly 60 percent.  For businesses in rural communities, the share of funding is up nearly 30 percent since we came to office.  And the share of funding distributed through banks that traditionally help minority-owned businesses is up more than 40 percent. 

And today, I’m announcing additional changes to the PPP program that will make sure we look out for the mom-and-pop business even more than we already have.  As I explained to Pilar and Tim — the two small-business people I spoke to on Wednesday — the Small Business Administration is going to establish a 14-day exclusive PPP loan application period for businesses and nonprofits with fewer than 20 employees.  People can — can go out and find how to get a hold of these — these loans.  People can find out more at the SBA.gov. 

The Small Business Administration will also remove barriers that have stopped many businesses from being able to apply for these loans.  For example, we’re making it so that a student loan default or a non-fraud-related criminal record does not prohibit someone from applying for the program.

We’re also making it easy for those one-person businesses — like the home repair contractors; beauticians; small, independent retailers — to secure forgivable PPP loans. 

At the same time, we’re increasing access by increasing oversight.  I invite any inspector general in this program, with jurisdiction over this program, to closely look at these loans and report — publicly report on any issues they uncover inconsistent with what I’m saying today.  We will ensure every dollar is spent well.  These changes will bring much-needed, long-overdue to — help to small businesses who really need help staying open, maintaining jobs and making ends meet.  And this is a starting point, not the ending point. 

We need Congress to pass my American Rescue Plan.  It deals with the immediate crisis facing our small businesses. 

Now, critics say the plan is too big.  Let me ask them a rhetorical question: What would you have me cut?  What would you leave out?  The American Rescue Plan targets $50 billion to support the hardest-hit small businesses after this program expires at the end of March.  Would you not help invest in them?  Would you let them continue to go under?  Would you leave them out again, like the previous administration did? 

One of the things I’ve heard again and again from small-business owners like Pilar and Tim is that knowing about support is one thing; being — gaining access to getting it is another.

That’s why we proposed $175 million to bring community organizations in to serve as “navigators” who’ll help them through this process of application.

We would also establish a hotline, with help available in multiple languages, so folks can pick up a phone and get the help they need to stay open and serve their community.

Again, the critics: “It’s too big.”  Should we not — should we stop spending money on them?  Do we not want a return on investment that we make in these businesses to be able to stay open and thrive and pay back?

Why would we not want to make sure a small business, who lack teams of lawyers, bankers, and accountants, have an advocate — someone they can rely on — to direct them to help that’s there for them now — will be there for them?

The American Rescue Plan is a rescue plan for America’s small businesses and America’s mainstream businesses.  And we need Congress to pass it right away.  I’m grateful to the Senate and the House for moving so quickly.

And I want to make it clear: I’m prepared to hear ideas about how to make the American Rescue Plan better and cheaper.  But we have to make clear who we’re helping and who it would hurt.

I always try to help people like Tim and Pilar and all the country’s small businesses, and families, the workers, the communities that depend on them to survive, recover, and grow.

And it’s my hope — my hope that as Democrats and Republicans, who have backed the PPP program — that Democrats and Republicans will back the American Rescue Plan.  The vast majority of the American people — more than 70 percent of the American people, including a majority of Republicans — want us to act based on all the polling data, and act big and act quickly. 

Major economists — left, right, and center — here and abroad say we should focus on smart investments that can make jobs available and focus on the jobs and in the people to prevent lo- — prevent long-term economic damage to our nation and to strengthen the economic competitiveness going forward. 

In fact, an analysis by Wall Street’s firm, Moody’s, estimates that if we pass my American Rescue Plan, the economy will create 7 million jobs this year.  This year.

We’ve also been in constant contact with the mayors and governors, county officials, members of Congress of both parties in every state.  That includes a letter, I might add, from more than 400 mayors from big and small cities, Democrat and Republican.  They agree we have to act and act now.  They understand we’re not going to get our economy back in shape and the millions of people back to work until we beat this virus. 

Getting our economy back means bringing our small businesses back.  And that’s what we’re going to do.  That’s what I’m doing today.  We’re going to focus.  The program ends at the end of March, but for the next two weeks, the only folks who can apply for that PPP money are businesses with fewer than 20 employees. 


Albert, thank you very much.  Thank you not only for what you do for the — the credit you give me that I really don’t deserve.  This is — this is a case of life and death.  We’re talking about people’s lives.  

I want you to know that once we beat COVID, we’re going to do everything we can to end cancer as we know it.  I’ve asked Dr. Eric Lander, a renowned Harvard/MIT scientist, to co-lead the Presidential Council of Advisors in Science and Technology, and the Office of Science and Technology Policy. These are the White House offices that bring together the country’s top scientists and address our most pressing needs.  

They’ll be part of the administration’s work to develop a DARPA-like advanced research effort on cancer and other diseases, just like there is DARPA in the Defense Department that develops the breakthroughs to protect our country. 

This administration is going to be guided by science — to save lives and to make lives better.  And that’s why I wanted to come here, Albert, to thank you and to thank all the workers here in Kalamazoo.  And I’m here to thank my good friend, Governor Whitmer, and she has become a good and close friend. The Governor have been on the frontlines of this pandemic, as well, for a long time, and I think she’s doing an incredible job in a very difficult circumstances.

And Michigan is also fortunate to have my buddy Gary Peters as United States senator, and Debbie Stabenow.  Gary is here.  Gary has been a workhorse in making sure that we move through this funding to get things done, because he understands better than anyone: It’s about urgency — the urgency of the moment.  So, Gary — thank you, Senator.  Thank you for all you’re doing.

Last week, I toured the Vaccine Research Center at the National Institute of Health in Bethesda, Maryland.  I met world-class doctors, scientists, and researchers who were critical for discovering the vaccines in record time.  I remember when we first started talking about this, asking Dr. Fauci and others. They said, “Well, it could take up to several years, maybe as many as six or eight years, to find — find a vaccine.”  It’s a miracle of science and the brilliant minds that we have around us.

And now it’s a second miracle — a miracle of manufacturing — to produce hundreds of millions of doses. Let me say that again: hundreds of millions of doses.

I came here because I want the American people to understand the extraordinary — extraordinary work that’s being done to undertake the most difficult operational challenge this nation has ever faced.

And let me say parenthetically that it’s not enough that we find cures for Americans.  There needs to be cures that the world is able to take part of, because you can’t build a wall or a fence high enough to keep a pandemic out.

On our tour, I met a few of your nearly 3,000 workers, Albert: experts managing ingredients that come in from different cities and states; experts handling 3D modeling and artificial intelligence to ensure that every dose is properly crafted; experts ensuring an environ- — a sterile environment so that each vial — each and every one — is safe and free of contaminants.

All of this is followed by extensive safety and quality control inspection, then careful packaging and labeling.  We walked by a freezer farm that then keeps those doses viable so they can be shipped.  This is an incredibly complex process.  And at every stop, safety is the utmost priority.

The whole process takes teamwork, precision, and around-the-clock focus. Machinists operating some of the most advanced equipment in the world, working side by side with chemists, biologists, pioneering technologies that, less than a year ago, were little more than theories and aspirations.

And it takes a partnership, in our view, between the federal government and all of the companies and universities contributing to the vaccine effort. 

Just over four weeks ago, America had no real plan to vaccinate most of the country.  My predecessor — as my mother would say, “God love him” — failed to order enough vaccines, failed to mobilize the effort to administer the shots, failed to set up vaccine centers.  That changed the moment we took office.  

I directed Jeff Zients, my COVID-19 Response Coordinator, to lead my administration’s work with the vaccine manufacturers to buy more vaccines and to speed up delivery.  Albert referenced it earlier, and I want to thank him for making it happen.  Because we worked together, we’re now on track to have enough vaccine supply for all Americans by the end of July.  And it doesn’t mean that it’ll be in all Americans’ arms, but enough vaccine will be available by that time.  These orders allow facilities like this one to plan ahead, accelerate their production schedules.  

Here’s what else we did: When we discovered that vaccine manufacturers weren’t being prioritized when it came to scrutinizing and securing supplies they needed, we fixed that problem and got them what they needed.  We also used the Defense Production Act to speed up the supply chain for que- — for key equipment, like fill pumps and filters, which has already helped increase vaccine production.  

In fact, on our tier [sic] — on our tour today, they showed me a critical piece of machinery they didn’t have before; now, they do.  And it’s allowing them to ramp up production.  

And as we increase supply, we’re carrying out a clear plan to get shots into the arms of 300 million Americans or more.  And I know people want confidence that it’s safe.  Well, I just toured, and that’s — where it’s being made.  It takes more time to do the check for safety than it does to actually make the vaccine. That’s how fastidious they are.  

And listen to Dr. Fauci.  Dr. Fauci assured me the COVID-9 [sic] vact- — vaccines were safe.  That’s why, several weeks ago, I went through the rigorous scientific review.  That’s why I took my vaccine shot publicly to demonstrate to the American people that I know and believe it’s safe.  That’s why Vice President Harris also received her shot publicly.  

We all know there is some history — there’s some hesitancy about taking this vaccine.  We all know there’s a history in this country of having subjected certain communities to terrible medical abuses in the past.  But if there’s one message to cut through to everyone in this country, it’s this: The vaccines are safe.  Please, for yourself, your family, your community, this country, take the vaccine when it’s your turn and available.  That’s how to beat this pandemic.  

And we’re making progress.  We deployed more vaccinators, the people who put the vaccine in your arm. We’re now making it possible for retired doctors and nurses to come back and, under the law, administer these shots.  We’ve put new vaccinators in the field.  These include over 800 medical personnel from our Commissioned Corps at the Department of Health and Human Services, and personnel from the Federal Emergency Management Agency — FEMA — the Defense Department, the National Guard.  We’re literally lining up — we’re lining up thousands of vaccinators, because it’s one thing to have the vaccine, and it’s very different to get it in someone’s arms.     

We’re also creating more places for people to get vaccinated.  We’ve provided $3 billion to states, territories, and tribes to create hundreds of new vaccination centers to ramp — and ramp up the existing ones that now — that are there.  

Right here in Michigan, with Governor Whitmer, FEMA has provided tens of millions of dollars to bolster the state’s community vaccination centers, from the National Guard at the Expo Center here in Kalamazoo, to the TF- — excuse me, the TCF Center in Detroit, to parking lots and churches across the state.  

We’ve worked with governors in California, Texas, New York, and more to come, to stand up massive — mass vaccine sites in stadiums that will be open 24/7, and arenas and community centers.  It’s an effort that’s on top of the federal government covering the full cost for the states’ use of their National Guards for pandemic efforts.  And you suggested I do that a while ago, and I promised you I’d do it, and we did it.

We also started shipping vaccines directly to thousands of local pharmacies across the country so eligible folks can get the COVID-19 shot like they would a flu shot.  

Here in Michigan, that’s already more than 220 pharmacies, like Rite Aid and Meijers, in more than 130 Michigan cities.  And that’s just the beginning.  It’s only been four weeks. 

And for folks who aren’t near a pharmacy or a mass vaccination center, we’re deploying mobile clinics. These are special vehicles and pop-up clinics that meet folks where they live — folks who don’t have access to transportation to get the shots.  

We’re also supplying vaccines to community health centers — federal community health centers — to reach those who are hit the hardest: black, Latinos, Native Americans, and rural communities, which have higher rates of COVID infections and deaths than any other group.  

Here in Michigan, we’re already partnering with community health centers, serving more than 370,000 patients in 11 cities across the state.  That’s because you guys have pointed out where they were and why it was so important, and how we get to — as Gary talks about, get to the people most in need and the people most dying from COVID.  This is important to ensure everyone is treated equally and those hardest hit get the care they deserve.   

We’re now at a point where we’ve seen the average daily number of people vaccinated nearly double, from the week before I took office, to about 1.7 million average per day getting a shot.  We’re on track to surpass my commitment.  

You may remember when I said, “In my first 100 days,” just before I was inaugurated — which seemed like 100 days.  But anyway, “The first 100 days,” before I was inaugurated, “that we’d administer 100 million shots in my first 100 days.”  But we’re on the path to do that.  We’re averaging 1.7 million a day. Soon we’ll be at 50 million, and I’m confident we’ll exceed the number.  But that’s just the floor.  We have to keep going.    

But despite the progress, we’re still in the teeth of a pandemic.  New strains are emerging.  In a few days, we’ll cross 500,000 Americans who will have died from COVID-19.  Five hundred thousand.  That is almost 70,000 more than all the Americans who died in World War Two, over a four-year period. All the sorrow, all the heartache, all the pain.    

And while we wait for everyone to get vaccinated, we still need you to wash your hands, stay socially distanced, and mask up to help save lives.  That’s why, with the authority I have as President, I signed an executive order — the only authority I have to require this — to require masking on all federal property, all modes of travel like planes, trains, and buses.  And we’ve been calling on governors and mayors and local officials — Republicans and Democrats -– to institute mask mandates within their jurisdictions, just like Governor Whitmer has done here in Michigan.  

Look, I know it’s inconvenient, but you’re making a difference when you do it. Everything we do matters. We need everyone to do their part for themselves, for their loved ones, and, yes, for your country.  It’s a patriotic duty.    

We need Congress to pass my American Rescue Plan that deals with the immediate crisis — the urgency. Now, critics say my plan is too big, that it costs $1.9 trillion.  So that’s too much.  Well, let me ask them: What would they have me cut?  What would they have me leave out?  Should we not invest $20 billion to vaccinate the nation?  Should we not invest $290 million [billion] to extend unemployment insurance for the 11 million Americans who are unemployed so they can get by while they get back to work?  Should we not invest $50 billion to help small businesses stay open, when tens of thousands have had to close permanently?  Should we not invest — and, by the way, they make up half the employment in America. Should we not invest $130 million [billion] to help schools across the nation open safely?  

Right now, 24 million adults, 11 million children don’t have enough food to eat. And unless you think I’m exaggerating, think of those scenes you’ve seen on the television with cars lined up, which seemed like miles, to wait to have someone put a box of food in their trunk.  People never, ever, ever, ever, ever, ever thought they would need help, and through no fault of their own, they’re in that circumstance.

If we don’t pass the American Rescue Plan, 40 million Americans will lose [some of their] nutritional assistance through a program we call SNAP, the old food stamp program.  Do we not invest $3 million — $3 billion to keep families from going hungry? 

One in five Americans are behind in their rent.  One in ten are being in their mortgages.  How many people do you know that will go to bed tonight staring at the ceiling, saying, “God, what is going to happen if I don’t get my job, if I don’t have my unemployment check?  What’s happened to me?  I’m losing my health insurance.  What do I do?” 

This is the United States of America, for God’s sake.  We invest in people who are in need.  Do we not invest $35 billion to help people keep a roof over their heads?  I could go on, but you get the point.  I’m grateful that the Senate and the House are moving quickly.  And I’m prepared to hear their ideas on how to make the package better and make it cheaper.  I’m open to that.

But we have to make clear who is helped and who is hurt.  And my hope is that the Republicans in Congress listen to their constituents.  

According to the polls, there is overwhelming bipartisan support.  The vast majority of the American people — more than 70 percent of the American people, with all the polls you all conduct, including a majority of Republicans — want us to act, and act big and quickly and support the plan.

Major economists — left, right, and center — say we should focus on smart investments we can make now in jobs, in our people to prevent long-term economic damage to our nation and to strengthen the economic competitiveness going forward.

In fact, an analysis by the Wall Street firm Moody’s estimates that if we pass my American Rescue Plan, the economy will create 7 million jobs this year. This year.  

We’ve also been in constant contact with mayors and governors, county officials, members of Congress — both parties.  Both parties.  I’ve met with them in my office; I’ve met with them in — on the — on the Internet — on — Zooming on with them.  Both parties in every state.  And guess what?  They agree we have to act now.  

I got a letter from more than 400 mayors, from big cities and small town. They understand we’re not going to get our economy back in shape and the millions of people back to work until we beat this virus.  

That’s why the American Rescue Plan puts 160 million — billion dollars into more testing and tracing, manufacturing and distribution, and setting up vaccination sites — everything that’s needed to get vaccines into people’s arms, which is the most difficult logistical effort the United States has undertaken in peace time.  It includes $4 billion for new manufacturing plants so we’re ready to manufacture vaccines in the future.  We don’t have to wait.  

I’m going to close with what I said before: I’ll always be straight with you.  I said in my inaugural I’ll be — “give it to you straight from the shoulders,” Roosevelt said.  Because the American people can take the truth.  They can handle anything.  

I can’t give you a date when this crisis will end, but I can tell you we’re doing everything possible to have that day come sooner rather than later.  

And all of you here are doing some of the most important work in this facility, right here, that can be done.

And I know this is personal: I walked in today, and I won’t say who came up to me, but one of the people in this building came up to me and said, “My father-in-law is dying from COVID.”  I said, “Can I call?”  He said, “No.  He couldn’t take a call.”  He says, “Keep him in his prayers, please.”  

How many of you know somebody who’s in real trouble or has passed?  How many people do you know who sat down to breakfast this morning and looked at an empty chair across the table?

You’ve seen the devastation of this virus in your family, your community, but you’re stepping up.  You’re saving lives here — lives of your loved ones, your neighbors, your fellow Americans.  You’re showing how this town, this state, this country takes care of our own, leaves nobody behind.  

We can do anything when we do it together.  I believe we’re on the road.  And I promise you, I know we’ll run into bumps.  It’s not going to be easy here to the end, but we’re going to beat this.  We’re going to beat this.  

May God bless you all.  And may God protect our troops.  And, Albert, thank you and your people for all you do.


Thank you, Mr. Ambassador.  And it’s great to be with Angela and Emmanuel.  We just spent part of — from Washington’s perspective — the morning together.  But I want to say hello to everyone and thanks, you — at the Munich Conference for hosting this special session. 

For decades, as you pointed out, I’ve participated in the Munich Security Conference — as a U.S. senator, joining my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to affirm the importance of the transatlantic partnership; three times as the Vice President of the United States, including delivering the first international foreign policy address of the Obama-Biden administration in the first months we were in office. 

And two years ago, as you pointed out, when I last spoke at Munich, I was a private citizen; I was a professor, not an elected official.  But I said at that time, “We will be back.”  And I’m a man of my word.  America is back.

I speak today as President of the United States at the very start of my administration, and I’m sending a clear message to the world: America is back.  The transatlantic alliance is back.  And we are not looking backward; we are looking forward, together. 

It comes down to this: The transatlantic alliance is a strong foundation — the strong foundation — on which our collective security and our shared prosperity are built.  The partnership between Europe and the United States, in my view, is and must remain the cornerstone of all that we hope to accomplish in the 21st century, just as we did in the 20th century.

The challenges we face today are different.  We’re at an inflection point.  When I spoke to you as a senator and as even as Vice President, the global dynamics have shifted.  New crises demand our attention.  And we cannot focus only on the competition among countries that threaten to divide the world, or only on global challenges that threaten to sink us all together if we fail to cooperate.  We must do both, working in lockstep with our allies and partners.

So let me erase any lingering doubt: The United States will work closely with our European Union partners and the capitals across the continent — from Rome to Riga — to meet the range of shared challenges we face. 

We continue to support the goal of a Europe whole and free and at peace.  The United States is fully committed to our NATO Alliance, and I welcome Europe’s growing investment in the military capabilities that enable our shared defense.

You know, to me and to the United States, and to us, we’ll keep article — we’ll keep faith with Article 5.  It’s a guarantee.  An attack on one is an attack on all.  That is our unshakable vow.  And the only time Article 5 has been invoked was after the United States was attacked on 9/11.  You, our allies, joined us to fight al Qaeda, and the United States committed to consulting closely with our NATO Allies and partners on the way forward in Afghanistan.

My administration strongly supports the diplomatic proc- — process that’s underway and to bring an end to this war that is closing out 20 years.  We remain committed to ensuring that Afghanistan never again provides a base for terrorist attacks against the United States and our partners and our interests. 

Our European partners have also stood with us to counter ISIS.  Just this week, NATO Defense Ministers endorsed a significantly expanded training and advisory mission in Iraq, which will be vital to the ongoing fight against ISIS.  We cannot allow ISIS to reopen and regroup and threaten people in the Middle East, in Europe, in the United States, and elsewhere.

And while the United States is undergoing a thorough review of our own force posture around the world, I’ve ordered the halting of withdrawal of American troops from Germany.  I’m also lifting the cap imposed by the previous administration on the number of U.S. forces able to be based in Germany. 

I know — I know the past few years have strained and tested our transatlantic relationship, but the United States is determined — determined to reengage with Europe, to consult with you, to earn back our position of trusted leadership.

Earlier today, as was referenced, I participated in the first meeting of the G7 leaders, where I spoke about the dire need to coordinate multilateral action to address COVID-19, the global economic crisis, and the accelerating climate crisis, and so much else. 

Achieving these goals is going to depend on a core strategic proposition, and that is: The United States must renew America’s enduring advantages so that we can meet today’s challenges from a position of strength.  That means building back better our economic foundations; reclaiming our place in international institutions; lifting up our values at home, and speaking out to defend them around the world; modernizing our military capabilities while leading with diplomacy; revitalizing America’s network of alliances and partnerships that have made the world safer for all people. 

You know, I hope our fellow democracies are going to join us in this vital work.  Our partnerships have endured and grown through the years because they are rooted in the richness of our shared democratic values.  They’re not transactional.  They’re not extractive.  They’re built on a vision of a future where every voice matters, where the rights of all are protected and the rule of law is upheld. 

None of this has fully succeeded in this — none of us has fully succeeded in this division [vision].  We continue to work toward it.  And in so many places, including in Europe and the United States, democratic progress is under assault. 

I have known for — I’ve known many of you for a long, long time, and you know that I speak my mind, so let me be straightforward with you all: We are in the midst of a fundamental debate about the future and direction of our world.  We’re at an inflection point between those who argue that, given all the challenges we face — from the fourth industrial revolution to a global pandemic — that autocracy is the best way forward, they argue, and those who understand that democracy is essential — essential to meeting those challenges. 

Historians are going to examine and write about this moment as an inflection point, as I said.  And I believe that — every ounce of my being — that democracy will and must prevail.  We must demonstrate that democracies can still deliver for our people in this changed world.  That, in my view, is our galvanizing mission. 

Democracy doesn’t happen by accident.  We have to defend it, fight for it, strengthen it, renew it.  We have to prove that our model isn’t a relic of our history; it’s the single best way to revitalize the promise of our future.  And if we work together with our democratic partners, with strength and confidence, I know that we’ll meet every challenge and outpace every challenger. 

You know, we must prepare together for a long-term strategic competition with China.  How the United States, Europe, and Asia work together to secure the peace and defend our shared values and advance our prosperity across the Pacific will be among the most consequential efforts we undertake.  Competition with China is going to be stiff.  That’s what I expect, and that’s what I welcome, because I believe in the global system Europe and the United States, together with our allies in the Indo-Pacific, worked so hard to build over the last 70 years. 

We can own the race for the future.  But to do so, we have to be clear-eyed about the historic investments and partnerships that this will require.  We have to protect — we have to protect for space for innovation, for intellectual property, and the creative genius that thrives with the free exchange of ideas in open, democratic societies.  We have to ensure that the benefits of growth are shared broadly and equitably, not just by a few. 

We have to push back against the Chinese government’s economic abuses and coercion that undercut the foundations of the international economic system.  Everyone — everyone — must play by the same rules. 

U.S. and European companies are required to publicly disclose corporate governance — to corporate governance structures and abide by rules to deter corruption and monopolistic practices.  Chinese companies should be held to the same standard. 

We must shape the rules that will govern the advance of technology and the norms of behavior in cyberspace, artificial intelligence, biotechnology so that they are used to lift people up, not used to pin them down.  We must stand up for the democratic values that make it possible for us to accomplish any of this, pushing back against those who would monopolize and normalize repression. 

You know, this is also — this is also how we’re going to be able to meet the threat from Russia.  The Kremlin attacks our democracies and weaponizes corruption to try to undermine our system of governance.  Russian leaders want people to think that our system is more corrupt or as corrupt as theirs.  But the world knows that isn’t true, including Russians — Russia’s own citizens. 

Putin seeks to weaken European — the European project and our NATO Alliance.  He wants to undermine the transatlantic unity and our resolve, because it’s so much easier for the Kremlin to bully and threaten individual states than it is to negotiate with a strong and closely united transatlantic community. 

That’s why — that’s why standing up for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine remains a vital concern for Europe and the United States.  That’s why addressing recklessness — Russian recklessness and hacking into computer networks, in the United States and across Europe and the world, has become critical to protecting our collective security.  The challenges with Russia may be different than the ones with China, but they’re just as real. 

And it’s not about pitting East against West.  It’s not about we want a conflict.  We want a future where all nations are able to freely determine their own path without a threat of violence or coercion.  We cannot and must not return to the reflective [reflexive] opposition and rigid blocs of the Cold War.  Competition must not lock out cooperation on issues that affect us all.  For example, we must cooperate if we’re going to defeat COVID-19 everywhere. 

My first presidential national security memorandum focused on surging health and humanitarian responses to defeat COVID-19 and to better prevent and prepare for the next pandemic. 

Today, I’m announcing that the United States is making a $2 billion pledge to COVAX, with the promise of an additional $2 billion to urge others to step up as well.  

Yet, even as we fight to get out of the teeth of this pandemic, the resurgence of Ebola in Africa is a stark reminder that we must simultaneously work to finally finance health security; strengthen global health systems; and create early warning systems to prevent, detect, and respond to future biological threats, because they will keep coming.  We have to work together to strengthen and reform the World Health Organization.  We need a U.N. system focused on biological threats that can move quickly to trigger action.

Similarly, we can no longer delay or do the bare minimum to address climate change.  This is a global, existential crisis, and we’ll all suffer — we’ll all suffer the consequences if we fail. 

We have to rapidly accelerate our commitments to aggressively curb our emissions and to hold one another accountable for meeting our goals and increasing our ambitions.  

That’s why, as President, I immediately rejoined the Paris Agreement, and as of today, the United States is officially once again a party to the Paris Agreement, which we helped put together.

On Earth Day, I will host a leaders summit to help drive more ambitious actions among top emitters, including domestic climate action here in the United States. 

I am grateful — I’m grateful for Europe’s continued leadership on climate issues over the last four years.  Together, we need to invest in the technological innovations that are going to power our clean energy futures and enable us to build clean energy solutions to global markets. 

The threat of nuclear proliferation also continues to require careful diplomacy and cooperation among us.  We need transparency and communication to minimize the risk of strategic misunderstanding or mistakes.  That’s why the United States and Russia, notwithstanding other competition, extended the New START Treaty for an additional four [five] years once I came — I was sworn in. 

That’s why we have said we’re prepared to reengage in negotiations with the P5+1 on Iran’s nuclear program.  We must also address Iran’s destabilizing activities across the Middle East, and we’re going to work in close cooperation with our European and other partners as we proceed. 

We’ll also work together to lock down fissile and radiological material to prevent terrorist groups from acquiring or using them. 

Look, the range of challenges Europe and the United States must take on together is broad and complex.  And I’m eager to hear — I’m eager to hear — I’m eager to hear next from my good friends and outstanding leaders, Chancellor Merkel, about her thoughts on the way forward together. 

So let me conclude with this: We cannot allow self-doubt to hinder our ability to engage each other or the larger world.  The last four years have been hard.  But Europe and the United States have to lead with confidence once more, with faith in our capacities, a commitment to our own renewal, with trust in one another and the ability of Europe and the United States to meet any challenge to secure our futures together.

I know we can do this.  We’ve done it before. Just yesterday — after a seven-month, 300-million mile journey — NASA successfully landed the Perseverance Rover on Mars. It’s on a mission of exploration, with elements contributed by our European partners to seek evidence of the possibility of life beyond our planet and the mysteries of the universe.

Over the next few years — “Percy” is (inaudible) call — but Perseverance will range and collect samples from the Red Planet and pile them up so another mission and rover, envisioned as a joint effort between NASA and the European Space Agency, will retrieve this trove of scientific wonders and bring it home to all of us.

That’s what we can do together.  If our unbound capacity to carry us to Mars and back don’t tell us anything else, they tell us we can meet any challenge we can face on Earth.  We have everything we need.  And I want you to know the United States will do — we’ll do our part.  We’ll stand with you.  We’ll fight for our shared values.  We’ll meet the challenges of this new moment in history. 

America is back.  So let’s get together and demonstrate to our great, great grandchildren, when they read about us, that democracy — democracy — democracy functions and works, and together, there is nothing we can’t do.  So let’s get working.

 Good afternoon, folks.  The Vice President and I have some good news to report, and I’d like to make two key announcements today related to our COVID-19 vaccination effort. 

As you know, a few days ago, after a rigorous opening — open and objective scientific review process, the Food and Drug Administration issued an emergency use authorization for the Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 vaccine.  We should all be encouraged by this news of a third safe and highly effective COVID-19 vaccine.  The more people who get vaccinated, the faster we’re going to overcome this virus and get back to our loved ones, get our economy back on track, and start to move back to normal.

But that’s — one of my first goals in office was — when I got into office was to say that there will be 100 million vaccination shots administered in my first 100 days in office.  We’ve got halfway to that goal in 37 days, and I feel confident we’ll make it all the way. 

As I — and as I’ve said, we have a long way to go, but, you know, as I said from the outset, we’re going to use every resource of the federal government to make it happen.  Among the things I learned when I came into office was that Johnson & Johnson was behind in manufacturing and production.  While we pote- — while we had the potential of another highly effective vaccine to accompany the two existing vaccines, it simply wasn’t coming fast enough.  So my team — my team has been hard at work to accelerate that effort.

As I’ve always said, this was a wartime effort, and every action has been on the table, including putting together breakthrough approaches.

And today, we’re announcing a major step forward: Two of the largest healthcare and pharmaceutical companies in the world — that are usually competitors — are working together on the vaccine.  Johnson & Johnson and Merck will work together to expand the production of Johnson & Johnson’s vaccine.  This is the type of collaboration between companies we saw in World War Two. 

We also invoked the Defense Production Act to equip two Merck facilities to the standards necessary to safely manufacture the J&J vaccine.  And with the urging and assistance of my administration, Johnson & Johnson is also taking additional new actions to safely accelerate vaccine production.  Johnson & Johnson’s vaccine manufacturing facilities will now begin to operate 24/7.  

In addition, we’ll continue to use the Defense Production Act to expedite critical materials in vaccine production, such as equipment, machinery, and supplies. 

I’ve also asked the Department of Defense to provide daily logistical support to strengthen Johnson & Johnson’s efforts.  And I want to thank Johnson & Johnson and Merck for stepping up and being good corporate citizens during this national crisis. 

Here’s what all this means: We’re now on track to have enough vaccine supply for every adult in America by the end of May. 

Let me say that again: When I came into office, the prior administration had contracted for not nearly enough vaccine to cover adults in America.  We rectified that.  About three weeks ago, we were able to say that we’ll have enough vaccine supply for adults by the end of July. 

And I’m pleased to announce today, as a consequence of the stepped-up process that I’ve ordered and just outlined, this country will have enough vaccine supply — I’ll say it again — for every adult in America by the end of May.  By the end of May.  That’s progress — important progress. 

But it’s not enough to have the vaccine supply.  We need vaccinators — people to put the shots in people’s arms, millions of Americans’ arms. 

To date, we’ve brought back retired doctors and nurses.  We’ve developed — we deployed more than 1,500 federal medical personnel you usually see during natural disasters, from the Federal Emergency Management Agency — FEMA — and the Commissioned Health Corps at the Department of Health and Human Services, and the Defense Department, including the National Guard, with thousands of more to come. 

We’re also increasing the places where people can get vaccinated.  We’ve sent millions of vaccines to over 7,000 pharmacies to make it easier for folks to get their COVID-19 vaccine shot like they would their flu shot. 

The federal government is also working with states to set up hundreds of mass vaccination centers in places like stadiums, community centers, parking lots that vaccinate thousands of people per day.  My wife Jill and I just visited one in Houston last week.  It’s incredible. 

And with this increased production of three safe and effective vaccines, we have an opportunity to help address the urgent national need more quickly and getting our schools back open safely.  

Right now, an entire generation of young people is on the brink of being set back a year or more in their learning.  You can ask millions of parents; they understand.  We’re already seeing rising mental health concerns due in part to isolation.  

Educational disparities that have always existed grow wider each day that our schools remain closed.  And remote learning isn’t the same for every student, as you all know.

Our educators are doing everything they can to protect and educate our students, despite the lack of resources and as districts face budget crises that risk education jobs.

Moms and dads are exiting the workforce in astonishing numbers in order to care for and manage the school experience for their children at home, hindering their own opportunities for — and further undermining the health of our economy. 

This is a national imperative that we get our kids back into the classroom safely and as soon as possible.  As you know, back in December, I set a goal of having a majority of our K-through-8 schools open by the end of my first 100 days as President. 

To achieve that goal, I sent the American Rescue Plan to Congress to provide vital help to make sure schools can open safely — reopen safely.  Essential things like more teachers to reduce class sizes, more buses and bus drivers to transport our kids safely, and more space to conduct in-person instructions, and more protective equipment, school cleaning services, physical alterations to reduce the risk of the spread of the virus.  All cost money.  The House passed the American Rescue Plan last week, and I hope the Senate will follow as quickly and as well. 

You know, also, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the CDC, issued new guidelines on how to reopen schools safely.  It’s a roadmap that will enable schools — if they have the resources they deserve — to reopen safely.  I have given those schools a roadmap.  I’ve asked Congress to give them the tools.  And today, to add one more tool to school reopening: a vaccinated workforce. 

Let me be clear: We can reopen schools if the right steps are taken, even before employees are vaccinated.  But time and again, we’ve heard from educators and parents that they have anxieties about that. 

So as yet another move to help accelerate the safe reopening of our schools, let’s treat in-person learning like an essential service that it is.  And that means getting essential workers who provide that service — educators, school staff, childcare workers — get them vaccinated immediately.  They’re essential workers. 

Over 30 states have already taken step to prior- –prioritize educators for vaccination.  And today, I’m using the full authority of the federal government.  I’m directing every state to do the same.  My challenge to all states, territories, and the District of Columbia is this: We want every educator, school staff member, childcare worker to receive at least one shot by the end of the month of March. 

To help make this happen, starting next week and for a month — the month of March, we will be using our federal pharmacy program to prioritize the vaccination of pre-K through 12 educators and staff and child-care workers.  Throughout March, they will be able to prioritize the vaccination of pre-K-through-12 educators and staff and childcare workers.  Throughout March, they will be able to sign up for an appointment at a pharmacy near them. 

And I want to be very clear: Not every educator will be able to get their appointment in the first week, but our goarl [sic] — goal is to do everything we can to help every educator receive a shot this month, the month of March.

I want to conclude with this: We’re making progress from the mess we inherited.  We’re moving in the right direction.  And today’s announcements are a huge step in our effort to beat this pandemic.  But I have to be honest with you: This fight is far from over.  I told you I’d be straight up with you from the beginning.  As I said many times, things may get worse again as new variants spread and as we face setbacks, like recent winter storms in the Midwest and South.  But our administration will never take this public health threat lightly. 

Though we celebrate the news of the third vaccine, I urge all Americans: Please keep washing your hands, stay socially distanced, wear masks — keep wearing them, get vaccinated when it’s your turn.  Now is not the time to let up.  I’ve asked the country to wear masks for my first 100 days in office.  Now is not the time to let our guard down.  People’s lives are at stake. 

We have already — we have already — and I carry this in my pocket — lost more — as of today, we’ve lost more than 511,839 Americans, as of today.  It’s got to stop. 

We need the United States Senate to follow the House and pass the American Rescue Plan, because despite the optimism, without new resources, our entire effort will be set back.  We need the resources in the American Rescue Plan and we need it urgently.  We need them expanding testing, ramp up vaccine distribution, fund FEMA and other federal vaccine efforts, and continue reimbursing states for their efforts. 

We need the resources to expand genomic sequencing; to stay ahead of emerging variants; find the protective gear, transportation, staffing, and other costs required for school and business to open safely.  We need to fund it.  The bottom line is: We need the American Rescue Plan now.  Now. 

There is light at the end of the tunnel, but we cannot let our guard down now or assure that victory is inevitable.  We can’t assume that.  We must remain vigilant, act fast and aggressively, and look out for one another.  That’s how we’re going to get ahead of this virus, get our economy going again, and get back to our loved ones. 

So thank you.  And please, please, it’s not over yet.  Great news, but stay vigilant.  May God bless you, and may God protect our troops.  Thank you all very, very much. 

 Good afternoon.  The Vice President and I had a very productive meeting with a bipartisan group of senators and House members to address an issue of both concern to our economic security, as well as our national security: the resilience and reliability of our critical supply chains.

This is a critical area where Republicans and Democrats agreed it was one of the best meetings — it’s the best meeting I think we’ve had so far, although we’ve only been here about five weeks.  But it was like the old days — people actually are on the same page. 

There were — good, bipartisan work has already been done.  The leaders of this operation in the House and Senate already did — have done great work, and I want to thank them for their leadership.

We’re here to build on that.  And the bottom line is simple: The American people should never face shortages in the goods and services they rely on, whether that’s their car or their prescription medicines or the food at the local grocery store.

And remember, the shortages in PPE during this pandemic –that meant we didn’t have the masks; we didn’t have gowns or gloves to protect our frontline health workers.

We heard horror stories of doctors and nurses wearing trash bags over their gown — over their dress in order to — so they wouldn’t be in trouble, because they had no gowns.  And they were rewashing and reusing their masks over and over again in the OR.

That should never have never happened.  And this will never happen again in the United States, period.  We shouldn’t have to rely on a foreign country — especially one that doesn’t share our interests or our values — in order to protect and provide our people during a national emergency. 

That’s why one of the first executive orders I signed, as some may remember, was to ensure that we’re manufacturing more protective equipment for healthcare workers here at home.

And today, I’m shortly going to be signing another executive order that’ll help address the vulnerabilities in our supply chains across additional critical sectors of our economy so that the American people are prepared to withstand any crisis and rely on ourselves.

This is about making sure the United States can meet every challenge we face in this new era — pandemics, but also in defense, cybersecurity, climate change, and so much more.  And the best way to do that is by protecting and sharpening America’s competitive edge by investing here at home.  As I’ve said from the beginning, while I was running: We’re going to invest in America.  We’re going to invest in American workers.  And then we can be in a much better position to even compete beyond what we’re doing now.

Resilient, diverse, and secure supply chains are going to help revitalize our domestic manufacturing capacity and create good-paying jobs, not $15 an hour — which is what we need to do someday.  And sooner is better, in my view.  But jobs that are at the prevailing wage. 

We’re going to spare new — spur new opportunities for small businesses, communities of color, and economically distressed areas.  And I will drive new investment in research and innovation and our workforce, investing in training and university partnerships that are going to lead to new technologies and new solutions. 

And all this won’t just strengthen our domestic capacity, it will help unleash new markets around the world and grow opportunities for American businesses to export their goods that we’re going to be making. 

These are the kinds of commonsense solutions that all Americans can get behind — workers and corporate leaders, Republicans and Democrats.  It’s about resilience, identifying possible points of vulnerabilities in our supply chains, and making sure we have the backup alternatives or workarounds in place. 

Remember that old proverb: “For want of a nail, the shoe was lost.  For want of a shoe, the horse was lost.”  And it goes on and on until the kingdom was lost, all for the want of a horseshoe nail.  Even small failures at one point in the supply chain can cause outside impacts further up the chain. 

Recently, we’ve seen how a shortage of computer chips — computer chips like the one I have here — you can hardly see it I imagine; it’s called a “semiconductor” — has caused delays in production of automobiles that has resulted in reduced hours for American workers.  A 21st century horseshoe nail. 

This semiconductor is smaller than a postage stamp, but it has more than 8 billion transistors — 8 billion transistors, 10,000 times thinner than a single human hair in this one chip.  These chips are a wonder of innovation and design that powers so much of our country, enables so much of our modern lives to go on — not just our cars, but our smartphones, televisions, radios, medical diagnostic equipment, and so much more.

We need to make sure these supply chains are secure and reliable.  I’m directing senior officials in my administration to work with industrial leaders to identify solutions to this semiconductor shortfall and work very hard with the House and Senate.  They’ve authorized the bill, but they need (inaudible) $37 billion, short term, to make sure we have this capacity.  We’ll push for that as well.  But we all recognize that the particular problem won’t be solved immediately. 

In the meantime, we’re reaching out to our allies, semiconductor companies, and others in the supply chain to ramp up production to help us resolve the bottlenecks we face now.  We need help to stop — we need to stop playing catch up after the supply-chain crisis hit.  We need to prevent the supply chain crisis from hitting in the first place. 

And in some cases, building resilience will mean increasing our production of certain types of elements here at home.  In others, it’ll mean working more closely with our trusted friends and partners, nations that share our values, so that our supply chains can’t be used against us as leverage. 

It will mean identifying and building surge capacity that can quickly be turned into and ramped up production in times of emergency.  And it will mean investing in research and development, like we did in the ’60s, to ensure long-term competi- — competitiveness in our manufacturing base in the decades ahead.

The order I’m about to sign does two things.  First, it orders a 100-day review of four vital products: semiconductors — one; key minerals and materials, like rare earths, that are used to make everything from harder steel to airplanes; three, pharmaceuticals and their ingredients; four, advanced batteries, like the ones used in electric vehicles.

There’s strong bipartisan support for fast reviews of these four areas because they’re essential to protecting and strengthening American competitiveness.

Second, this order initiates a long-term review of the industry basis of six sectors of our overall economy over the next year.  These reviews will identify policy recommendations to 40 of [fortify] our supply chains, to — it should be to fortify our supply chains at every step, and critically, to start implementing those recommendations right away.  We’re not going to wait for a review to be completed before we start closing the existing gaps. 

And as we implement this work, my administration will draw on a full range of American talent — including labor and industry leaders, policy experts, scientists, farmers, engineers — to get their input. 

I’m grateful for the members of Congress who came to see me — Republican leaders, as well as Democrats.  They’re leading the way.  We’re going to stay in close contact with members of both sides of the aisle and keep advancing our shared goals. 

Everyone has a role to play to strengthen our supply chains in our — and our country.  This is the United States of America.  We are better prepared to meet the challenges of the 21st century than any country in the world.  There’s nothing, nothing, nothing we’ve ever failed to achieve if we work together.  And that’s what we decided to do today, and that’s what we’re going to do: work together. 

So I thank you all.  I’m very optimistic about the meeting we had today with our congressional colleagues.  And now I’m going to walk over and sign that executive order.

Good afternoon.  It’s a good day today.  You know, when we took office 45 days ago, I promised the American people that help was on the way.  Today, I can say we’ve taken one more giant step forward in delivering on that promise that help is on the way.

I want to thank — start off by thanking the Vice President, but I want to thank all of the senators who worked so hard to reach a compromise to do the right thing for the American people during this crisis and voted to pass the American Rescue Plan.  It obviously wasn’t easy, it wasn’t always pretty, but it was so desperately needed — urgently needed.

Also, I also need to say a few words about the Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, who I spoke with many times on this and again this morning.  I served in the Senate, as you all know, for many years.  I’ve never seen anyone work as skillfully, as ably, as patiently, with determination, to deliver such a consequential piece of legislation that was so urgently needed as the American Rescue Plan.

Chuck Schumer — Senator Chuck Schumer, when the country needed you most, you led, Chuck, and you delivered.  Neither I nor the country will ever forget that.  And it’s not a moment too soon.  I’ve been talking about the urgency of this need.

For — for over a year, the American people were told they were on their own.  They were seeing — we’ve seen how hard that has been on so many Americans.  As of last night, 519,064 lives lost to the virus.  That many empty chairs this morning — the breakfast table — gone.  More than four hundred [thousand] small businesses closed unnecessarily.  Millions of people out of work through no fault of their own.  I want to emphasize that: through no fault of their own.  Food bank lines stretching for miles.  Did any of you ever you’d see that in America, in cities all across this country?  Families facing the threat of eviction.

This nation has suffered too much for much too long.  And everything in this package is designed to relieve the suffering and to meet the most urgent needs of the nation and put us in a better position to prevail, starting with beating this virus and vaccinating the country. 

The resources in this plan will be used to expand and speed up manufacturing and distribution of vaccines so we can get every single American vaccinated sooner than later.  I believe by — we’ll have enough by the end of — by the middle of May to vaccinate.  It’s going to take longer to take longer to get it in their arm, but that’s how much vaccine we’ll have.

Because of all the funding, we’ll be able to hire more vaccinators, set up more vaccination sites to get the country in a place to get back to normal.  This plan will get checks out the door, starting this month, to the American people who so desperately need the help, many of whom are lying in bed at night, staring at the ceiling, wondering, “Will I lose my job, if I haven’t already?  Will I lose my insurance?  Will I lose my home?”

Over 85 percent of American households will get direct payments of $1,400 per person.  For a typical middle-class family of four — husband and wife working, making $100,000 a year total, with three kids — they’ll get $5,600 — I mean, with two kids — will get $5,600, and it’ll be on the way soon.

That means the mortgage can get paid.  That means the child can stay in community college.  That means maintaining the health insurance you have.  It’s going to make a big difference

in so many of lives in this country.

 Unemployment benefits will be extended for 11 million Americans who have lost their jobs and who, last night, again were lying in bed, just thinking, “My lord, I’m going to lose my unemployment insurance in a week or so.”  It was about to expire.

Schools are going to have the resources they need to open safely.  States and local governments that have lost tens of thousands of essential workers will be — have the resources they need available to them, to those laid-off police officers, firefighters, teachers, and nurses they can rehire.  These are essential personnel.

Look, the American Rescue Plan lowers healthcare premiums.  Food and nutrition assistance.  It’s hard to believe that 24 million adults and 11 million children, as I speak, in the United States suffer from food insecurity.  That means, simply, they don’t have enough food to eat.  Did you ever imagine in the United States of America, you’d see lines, literally miles long — kids — folks in their automobiles, waiting for a box of food to be put in their trunk.  I stood in line, handing out food.  The people coming up never, ever, ever thought they’d be in that position. 

This helps families who are behind on their rent and their mortgage payments so they aren’t thrown out of their homes. 

Look, the bottom line is this:  This plan puts us

on the path to beating the virus.  This plan gives those

families who are struggling the most the help and the breathing room they need to get through this moment.  This plan gives small businesses in this country a fighting chance to survive.

And one more thing: This plan is historic.  Taken altogether, this plan is going to make it possible to cut child poverty in half.  Let me say that again — it’s significant, historic: It will cut child poverty in half.

There’s much more to this bill, but, for now, let me make one final point.  When I was elected, I said we were going to get the government out of the business of battling on Twitter and back in the business of delivering for the American people, of making a difference in their lives, giving everyone a chance — a fighting chance, of showing the American people that their government can work for them.  And passing the American Rescue Plan will do that.

And, you know, it may sound strange, but a lot of senators and congressmen I want to thank, but I really want to thank the American people for making all of this possible.  You say, “Well, how do they make it possible?”  Well, quite frankly, without the overwhelming bipartisan support of the American people, this would not have happened.  Your elected officials heard you.  Overwhelming public support — every public opinion poll shows overwhelming support for this plan.  And for the last weeks, it’s shown that.  Every public opinion poll shows the people want this, they believe it’s needed, and they believe it’s urgent. 

And now this bill returns to the House of Representatives, which has done a great job from the beginning, where I hope it will find quick passage so it can be sent to my desk to be signed into law.

By passing the American Rescue Plan, we’ll have heeded the voice of the American people, not ignored their voices.  By passing this plan, we will have delivered real, tangible results for the American people and their families, and they’ll be able to see and know and feel the change in their own lives.  And by passing this plan, we’ll have proved that this government, this democracy can still work.  What has to be done — it’ll improve people’s lives.  

And one more thing: The vast majority of economists — left, right, and center — from Wall Street to the — to the private — private economic polling initiatives — the economists — as I’ve said, left, right, and center — say, “In addition to the needs the people have, we need this to grow the economy.”  That if we haven’t spent this money and recreated the kind of incentive for people to be able to make a good living, that we’d be in real trouble. 

This will create millions of new jobs — it’s estimated over 6 million new jobs by itself; increase the Gross Domestic Product by a trillion dollars; put our nation in a position to out-compete the rest of the world — because the rest of the world is moving, particularly China; and to know that as tough as this moment is, there are brighter days ahead.  There really are. 

As I’ve said before, it’s never a good bet to bet against America.  It’s never been a good bet to bet against the American people.  We are America.  We’re going to get there.  We’re going to remain the leading economy in the world and going to be the most successful economy in the world because of you, the American people.

Thank you, and God bless you all.  May God protect our troops.  Thank you.

Nancy, I love you.  There’s no one I’d rather work with than you.  We’ve been friends a long time — and your whole family, your daughters.  And it — it’s just been a great relationship. 

And I think that Angie was absolutely correct that you’ve been the consummate leader.  I’ve been here a long time, and there’s been no Speaker that’s been your equal, although there have been some great Speakers.  And you just have a special way about you, Nancy. 

And you’re also very, very — which is important — you’re kind, but you’re tough.  And you know what’s right, and you stick by it.  And I admire the devil out of you.

And I want to thank somebody I campaigned for — he was leading by 30 points until I campaigned for him, but he still won anyway — Hakeem Jeffries — and Vice Chair Aguilar for putting this conference together and including me.

And I want to thank the entire leadership team and all your committee chairs for taking an important step in the American Rescue Plan last week.

You all showed, at a time when the American people are depending on us — and they are desperately in need of us — that a diverse caucus isn’t a divided caucus. 

Congressman Clyburn, I also want to note that it was almost exactly a year ago today that you delivered the endorsement to me in South Carolina that meant so much to me and my campaign.  And you’re a great friend.  And on the night of the — that primary, America had confirmed only fewer than 100 COVID cases.  That’s just a year ago.

Breonna Taylor and George Floyd were still alive.  California had yet to suffer the worst — the wor- — what would become the worst fire season in recorded history.  And there’d been no violent insurrection on Capitol Hill.  And I could go on.  A lot’s changed. 

My point is this: In the year that has passed, all the challenge I spoke about that night — jobs and the economy; affordable, accessible healthcare; climate change; and the need to root out institutional racism; the need for unity and healing — have all become urgent — urgent, urgent, urgent — especially in light of the pandemic that has taken the lives — well, as of yesterday — 518,720, I believe it was, Americans — fellow Americans who have lost their lives. 

And more than 400,000 businesses — mostly small business, many minority businesses — have been shuttered; cost millions of jobs.  1.3 million public sector — education, nurses, cops, firefighters, essential workers — have lost their jobs.

So my message today is really simple: You — you, this caucus, have shown the American people the difference Democratic leadership and what we just had.  Leadership makes a difference.  And you’re continuing to do so. 

For example, I know that this week you’re working on the “Protect Our Democracy” reforms, as well as the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act — both of which I strongly support.  And I know that, in the past couple of days, you’ve had briefings and conversations on immigration, healthcare, foreign policy, climate crisis, and a lot more.  And as you work on all of these, I urge you to continue to speak up and speak out about the American Rescue Plan.

And here is why: You know, the confidence in the American — in the American government has been plummeting since the late ‘60s to what it is now.  And many of you remember that in 2009, we expended a lot of political capital — Nancy and I and others — in the Recovery Act.  It was — it was an act that had less than two-tenths of 1 percent waste or fraud in it, according to the experts, and the economists told us we literally saved America from a depression. 

But we didn’t adequately explain what we had done.  Barack was so modest, he didn’t want to take, as he said, a “victory lap.”  I kept saying, “Tell people what we did.”  He said, “We don’t have time.  I’m not going to take a victory lap.”  And we paid a price for it, ironically, for that humility.

And this is a case where every single piece of the bill you passed addresses a genuine, desperate need for the American people.  Each piece isn’t just defensible, it is urgent and overwhelmingly supported by the people.  It’s good policy and it’s good politics.  And I’m not sure we’ve ever seen something that is needed as badly as the American Rescue Plan that was as broadly popular.

Nancy and I have passed some really important things in our careers, but they haven’t always been — they’ve been badly needed, but they haven’t been overwhelmingly popular. 

Sir, I’ve served in the Congress for 36 years before becoming Vice President for 8.  We never had anything this urgent and this ambitious that was so widely embraced.  Three-quarters of the American are together with — on this.  Three quarters.  Nearly unanimous support among Democrats; more than 70 percent of independents.  In poll after poll, 60 percent of Republicans — I’ll say that again — 60 percent of Republicans support what we’re doing.  A bipartisan group of more than 425 mayors, Democrat and Republican.  The AFL-CIO and business leaders.

Look, the show of unity we’re seeing is unprecedented.  It isn’t just about the sum of the total package; Americans are in lockstep on each major element of the plan, and they know what they are.  They support what we’re doing on vaccines.

Look at the progress we’ve made with your help.  We’ve been able to move us to the point where we had very little supply, to we will have enough vaccine because of the work we’ve done with your help — enough vaccine by the end of May to be able to vaccinate every single adult in America.  It will not be done by then, but that supply will be there. 

They support what we’re doing on direct payments, on unemployment insurance, on food and nutrition support, on keeping people in their homes, on safely reopening our schools. 

Staying unified as we complete this process to pass the American Rescue Plan won’t just make a difference in our fight against COVID-19 and our efforts to rebuild the economy, it will also show the American people we’re capable of coming together for what matters most to them.  They’ve lost faith in government; this is a time to reestablish that faith.  And the reason why they should have faith is because we’re doing the right thing.  It’s a show of strength and a first step forward to restoring their faith in the capacity of government to have their backs.  And if we deliver on this, it also builds momentum.  It builds real mome- — enthusiasm as well. 

And I will make everything else we want to deliver — this will make everything more possible to get it done.  That’s why starting off this victory is so important, because it’s so consequential to their lives.  And we know how much we have to do, but all starts — it all starts here.  It starts by bringing this home — bringing home what you’ve done all the way. 

And I know we’re all making some small compromises, but I want to thank you.  I want to thank you for the work you’ve done.  I want to thank you for the work we’re going to continue to do. 

I know parts of this — and everything else we seek to do — are not easy, but people are going to remember how we showed up in this moment, how we listened to them — to them — not special interests; to them — and how we took action. 

I believe we’re going to come through this, and I think that people’s memories will be long.  And if we continue to stay laser focused on getting shots in people’s arms, responding to the economic crisis, it’s going to open up a lot of hearts and a lot of doors for us tomorrow to do the many more things we know we have to do. 

 Thank you, Madam Vice President, and thank you, Mr. Secretary.

On Friday, I submitted to the Senate for confirmation my first slate of nominations for four-star command positions in our Armed Forces — among them, two outstanding and eminently

qualified warriors and patriots.  General Jacqueline Van Ovost in the United States Air Force is currently the only female four-star officer serving in our military.  I nominated her as Commander of the United States Transportation Command. 

And when confirmed, the Lieutenant General Laura Richardson, of the United States Army, will be promoted in rank and join General Van Ovost as the only four-star — as another four-star general.  I nominated her as Commander in the United States Southern Command. 

And, when confirmed, they will become the second and third women in the history of the United States Armed Forces to lead combatant commands.

Each of these women have led careers demonstrating incomparable skill, integrity, and duty to country.  And at every step, they’ve also helped push open the doors of opportunity to women in our military — blazing the trail a little wider, a little brighter for all the proud women following in their path and looking to their example. 

And I wanted to shine the light on these accomplishments for those women today because General Van Ovost — as reiterated in an interview this last week, and I’m the second person to say this — it’s hard to be what you can’t see.  It’s hard to be what you can’t see, but you’ll soon see.

Today is International Women’s Day.  And we all need to see and to recognize the barrier-breaking accomplishments of these women.  We need the young women just beginning their careers in the military service to see it and know that no door will be closed to them.  We need women and men throughout the ranks to see and celebrate women’s accomplishments and leadership in the services.  We need little girls and boys both, who have grown up dreaming of serving for their country, to know this is what generals in the United States Armed Forces look like.  This is what Vice Presidents of United States look like. 

So I’d like to spend just a few minutes today making sure that America knows who General Van Ovost is and Lieutenant General Richardson is.  They’re aviators.  Both learned to fly planes before they were old enough to drive a car. 

General Van Ovost, a first-generation — is a first-generation American: the daughter of Dutch immigrants who owned a flying operation.  She loved the freedom of flight and, as a teenager, flew herself to see Sally Ride lift off as the first woman in space.  Sixteen years old, goes down to see Sally Ride.  She said she was at several thousand feet watching from a distance. 

You know, women weren’t — were banned from flying combat missions when the General joined the force, so she focused on becoming a test pilot.  And instead of learning to fly just one plane, she learned to fly everything, including Air Force Two when I was Vice President. 

General Van Ovost currently is — oversees Air Mobility Command: approximately 107,000 airmen and 1,100 planes that enable America’s air power and humanitarian assistance to go everywhere in the world it need be.  From flying water to Texans after the recent storms, to ensuring our wounded warriors are evacuated for medical care from anywhere in the world, she gets it done. 

Lieutenant General Richardson’s parents were proud patriots.  It must have rubbed off because Lieutenant General Richardson and her brother and sister all joined the Army.  Her father encouraged her to join ROTC in college, even though that meant commuting to a different school. 

When Lieutenant General Richardson joined the Army Aviation Branch, women were banned from flying attack helicopters.  She flew to — in support of combatant — combat missions, and conducting lift operations of her UH-1 — the so-called “Huey” — and the Blackhawks. 

Now, as a commanding general of the United States Army North, Lieutenant General Richardson oversees military ground responses here in North America all over — all over the last year.  That’s meant getting military and medical personnel deployed to help in our response to this pandemic.  More than 4,500 military and medical personnel deployed in hospitals across 14 states and the Navajo Nation to treat COVID-19 patients.  It means more than 2,200 medical personnel are working, or soon will be, at vaccination sites in eight states and the United States Virgin Islands. 

I’m so proud of the incredible work Lieutenant General Richardson and her team have done to support the American people this year, and the American people are as well.  They’re warriors.  They’re crisis-tested commanders. 

But best of all — but best of all, they’re not done yet.  Neither of these incredible generals is resting on her laurels or on her stars.  They’re using their voices and actively working to change policies in the military to make it easier and safer for more women not just to join the military, but to stay in the military and to thrive. 

I’m incredibly proud that in 2015, under the Obama-Biden administration, we took the final steps to open up all positions in the military to anyone qualified to serve in them.  The women who join today’s military aren’t told “no” when they apply to fly fighter jets or attack helicopters just because of their gender.  They aren’t told “no” when they want to apply to Ranger School or infantry officer basic training. 

But they all know that there’s much, much more work to be done to ensure that women’s leadership is recognized  and we have more diverse leaders; we reach the top echelons of command for all who are qualified, including all women — all women; and that all women feel safe and respected in our military — period.

You know, some of — some of it is relatively straightforward work where we’re making good progress designing body armor that fits women properly; tailoring combat uniforms for women; creating maternity flight suits; updating — updating requirements for their hairstyles.  

And some of it is going to take — and — you know, an intensity of purpose and mission to really change the culture and habits that cause women to leave the military: 

That women are — making sure more diverse candidates are considering — being considered for career-advancing opportunities at every single level.

That women aren’t penalized in their careers for having children.

That women aren’t just token members, but integral parts throughout all branches and all divisions. 

And that they can completely, fairly engage in promotion and compete all across the board, including on the — on age and gender neutrality and the physical fitness test.

You know that both members of the — of the military couples can thrive while serving, like Lieutenant General Richardson and her husband, Lieutenant General Richardson, who, I might add, I want to thank you for getting me off a mountain that was about 12- to 14,000 feet up on a goat path when our helicopter went down in a snowstorm.  It’s good to see you, General.  The ride down that mountain was more perilous in a truck than it was in the helicopter, but thank you. 

And we have to take on sexual assault and harassment and violence against women in the military.  Sexual assault is a abhorrent and wrong at any time.  And in our military, where so much of unit cohesion is built on trusting your fellow service members to have your back, there’s nothing less than a threat to our national security. 

I know Secretary Austin takes this as seriously as Vice President Harris and I do.  That’s why his first memo as Secretary was a directive to take on sexual assault in the military and why he stepped up independent review — he set up an Independent Review Commission on Sexual Assault to make concrete recommendations for changes. 

This is going to be an all-hands-on-deck effort under my administration to end the scourge of sexual assault in the military.  And we’re going to be focused on that from the very top.  I know that we can do it.

The U.S. Military has defeated American enemies on land, in air, and at sea, and this is not beyond us. 

I want to thank General Van Ovost — Ovost and Lieutenant General Richardson for their exemplary careers and service to our country.  You’re America’s patriotism at its finest: undaunted and absolutely — absolutely able to do anything by any obstacle; determined to open wide and the doors of opportunity; and ready for the next challenge. 

It’s my great honor to serve as your Commander-in-Chief.  And I look forward to hearing your active-duty and recommendations of how we will work together to keep the American people safe to meet every challenge in the 21st century.

So I want to thank you both.  And I want to thank Sec- — the former general — I keep calling him “General.”  My — the guy who runs that outfit over there.  I want to make sure we thank the Secretary for all he’s done to try to implement what we’ve just talked about, and for recommending these two women for promotion. 

Thank you all.  May God bless you all.  And may God protect our troops.  Thank you. 

Good afternoon.  Thank you, Kamala.  You know, when I look out over what happened the last 50 days when Jill and I first got a chance to move into this magnificent building behind you, I promised the American people — and I guess this is becoming an overused phrase — that help was on the way. 

But today, with the American Rescue Plan now signed into law, we’ve delivered on that promise.  And I don’t mean I’ve delivered; we’ve delivered.  Look out there on all of you.  Patty, there would still be people, kids in poverty, were it not for all the work you did all those years. 

And I want to say to Bernie: Bernie, stepping up and making the case why this was so transformational made a big difference in how a lot of people voted. 

I look out at all of you, House members as well, who have made the case to the American people why this is so important.  I watched my buddy, Jim, down in South Carolina, stand up and talk about how it’s going to affect individual people. 

I haven’t — my inclination is to mention every single one of you, because I think I’ve called most of you and thanked you already for what you did.  I even called Pallone.  He wasn’t there, though; he was on the other side of the river.  We joke all the time.  He’s in — he’s in New Jersey; I’m in Delaware.  I keep reminding him Delaware owns the Delaware River up to the high watermark in New Jersey.  (Laughter.)

But all kidding aside, I want to thank you all.  I want to thank, particularly, the Speaker, who, from day one — from the very first day I got the nomination — was supportive in ways that are hard for me to describe. 

And, you know, I served a long time in the United States Senate, longer than anybody for — still there at the time, other than Pat.  If I were still in the Senate, I’d be Senate pro tem because I was two years ahead of Pat.  (Laughter.)

But all kidding aside, we’ve still got a lot of great majority leaders.  But I never saw anybody handle such a controversial, consequential piece of legislation that was right on the edge than Chuck Schumer.  I owe you, Chuck.  You did an incredible job.  (Applause.)

And look — and to the members of the House and Senate, thanks for making this happen.  You made it happen.  As I said, I served 36 years in the Senate.  I know how hard it is to pass major consequential legislation, particularly when we only have such minor, small majorities in both houses, Steny.  You’ve done an incredible job. 

And, Nancy and Chuck, I have to say that I agree with many of the columnists that have commented on this legislation: What you shepherded through the Congress not only meets the moment, it does even more.  It’s historical, and they call it transformational.  And it really is.  The bill was supported overwhelmingly by the American people — Democrats, independents, and Republicans — and had a strong support of governors and mayors across the country in both parties — red states and blues.  Over 430 mayors contacted me, many of them Republicans, supporting the bill. 

And here’s why: Because what you all did with it and the refinements you made, it directly addressed the emergency in this country because it focuses on what people need most. 

Debbie and I often talked about: You got to tell people in plain, simple, straightforward language what it is you’re doing to help.  You have to be able to tell a story, tell the story of what you’re about to do and why it matters because it’s going to make a difference in the lives of millions of people and in very concrete, specific ways. 

This leg- — this legislation, as everybody has already mentioned, will provide $1,400 in direct payments, which we all promised.  Well, that means for a typical family of four — a middle-class family, husband and wife working, making $110,000 a year — that means a $5,600 check they’re going to get.  Eighty-five percent of the households in America will be getting this money.  (Applause.)

Now, a lot of you know — because of the way you came up like I did and others — what that can mean.  Think of the millions of people going to sleep at night, staring at the ceiling, thinking, “My god, what am I going to do tomorrow?  I’ve lost my healthcare.  I don’t have a job.  Unemployment runs out.  I’m behind on my mortgage.  What are we going to do?”  Well, guess what?  They’re going to be getting that check soon, either by direct deposit or a check from the Treasury. 

And they’re going to — some are going to get it as early as this weekend.  This legislation provides resources needed to open our schools.  How many of you have dealt not only in your own home and with your children and grandchildren, if you have them, with how difficult it is, the mental pressure and stress that are on so many families?  So many people needing — need — needing help — if they had access to counseling — because it’s caused an enormous, enormous stress. 

This legislation extends unemployment insurance by $300 a week until September.  It’s going to help 11 million Americans who were days from losing that benefit.  This legislation includes the biggest investment in childcare since World War Two.  That’s not hyperbole; that’s just a fact.  It’s a fact. 

It provides help for small businesses to stay open.  And, you know, four hundred thou- — so many have had to close because, the first time around, you all worked and did a great piece of work, and the House passed a significant legislation.  What’s the first thing the last President — he fired — he fired the folks who were supposed to watch and make sure it got, in fact, distributed the way it was supposed to.  We find out so much of it went to people who didn’t need it.  You all took care of that. 

It extends coverage and lowers healthcare costs for so many Americans.  So many Americans.  And it’s a big number for people. 

It provides for food and nutrition.  Because people knew — and you all were out there handing out food like many of us were, but you saw people who were in car lines that were literally miles long.  You’d see four lanes of cars that went back for a half a mile each, just to get a box of food.  Again, through no fault of their own. 

It’s going to help people keep a roof over their heads.  A half million are — haven’t been able to make their — their mortgage payments, about to be thrown out of their apartments.  They have to make up all that they owe.  And those mom-and-pop realtors are in real trouble. 

It’s going to cut job poverty in half with — with — and, you know, I’ve talked to so many of you.  Rosa, you and I’ve spent so much time on this.  But you guys — you, Patty, and others — are the ones that have been leading this for so long, and it’s finally coming to fruition.  And the American people understand it. 

It pays for many of the steps we’ve taken on — to vaccinate Americans.  We’re going to be in a position where, because of what you all did in the past, we had the money to go out and literally purchase hundreds of millions of vaccines, and then go out and make sure we had enough vaccinators.  Vaccine is one thing.  To get the vaccine in a vial, out of that vial and into a needle, and a needle into someone’s arm — it took tens of thousands of people. 

And because of you, we were able to mobilize the military.  We were able to mobilize FEMA.  We were able — I was able, by executive order, to allow former docs and nurses to come back and be able to engage in this activity.

And one of the things that we said in the beginning that no one thought that I was being straight about was I said: This is going to create — we — we have to spend this money to make sure we have economic growth, unrelated to how much it’s going to help people.  Well, guess what?  Every single major economist out there — left, right, and center — supported this plan.  Even Wall Street agreed.  According to Moody’s, for example, by the end of this year, this law alone will create 7 million new jobs.  (Applause.)  Seven million.

And the bill does one more thing, which I think is really important: It changes the paradigm.  For the first time in a long time, this bill puts working people in this nation first.  It’s not hyperbole; it’s a fact.  (Applause.)   

For too long, it’s been the folks at the top.  They’re not bad folks.  A significant number of them know they shouldn’t be getting the tax breaks they had.  But it put the richest Americans first, who benefited the most.  And the theory was — we’ve all heard it, and especially the last 15 years.  The theory was: Cut taxes, and those at the top and the benefits they get will trickle down to everyone.  Well, you saw what trickle down does.  We’ve known it for a long time.  But this is the first time we’ve been able to, since the Johnson administration and maybe even before that, to begin to change the paradigm. 

We’ve seen time and time again that that trickle down does not work.  And, by the way, we don’t have anything against wealthy people.  You got a great idea, you’re going to go out and make millions of dollars — that’s fine.  I have no problem with that.  But guess what?  You got to pay your fair share.  You got to pay some.  Because guess what?  Folks who are making — living on the edge, they’re paying.  And so, again, all it’s done is make those at the top richer in the past, and everyone else falling behind. 

This time, it’s time that we build an economy that grows from the bottom up and the middle out — (applause) — the middle out.  And this bill shows that when you do that, everybody does better.  The wealthy do better.  Everybody does better across the board. 

If that’s our foundation, then everything we build upon will be strong — a strong foundation: our competitiveness around the world, the jobs here at home, the health and quality of our lives.  That’s what the American Rescue Plan represents, and it’s all about rebuilding what I’ve been saying, and Bernie and a lot of others are saying — the backbone of this country.  The backbone of this country are hardworking folks.  Hardworking folks.  Middle-class folks.  People who built the country.  And I might add, I think, unions built the middle class.  And it’s about creating opportunity and giving people a fair shot.  That’s really all and everything it’s about. 

In the coming weeks, Jill and I, and Kamala and Doug, and our Cabinet, with all of you — members of Congress — we’re going to be traveling the country to speak directly to the American people about how this law is going to make a real difference in their lives and how help is here for them.  Almost every single aspect would be significant — would be every — if you took the piece of this bill and broke it into all of the pieces, every one of those pieces standing alone would be viewed as a significant accomplishment.  But it’s all the work you’ve done for years to try to get us there. 
This law is not the end of our efforts, though.  I view it as only the beginning.  As we — look, one of the things that I’ve been most worried about, and I think you all have too — especially those of us who’ve been around for 100 years, like me — is you’ve watched people lose confidence in government.  Just lose confidence in that we tell the truth. 

That’s why, when I announced, I — I quoted Franklin Roosevelt.  He said, “I’ll give it to you straight from the shoulder.”  The American people can handle anything if you tell them the truth.  And they really can.  Just give it straight from the shoulder.  (Applause.)  And when we do something right, we’re going to make a case for it.  And when I make a mistake, I’m going to own up to it and say, “It was me.  I made a mistake.” 

And I said last night: This is not over.  Conditions can change.  We’re not finished yet.  Conditions can change.  The scientists have warned us about new variants of this virus.  And the devil is in the details of implementing this legislation. 

I know from experience when the President turned to me — like I haven’t done to the Vice President yet — and said, “Take care of it.  You take care of implementing the plan.”  But she could do it.  But I remember being — given the dubious distinction of having to implement a Recovery Act back in — when we came into office, Barack and I.  I spent literally four or five hours a day, for six months.  I talked to over 160 mayors probably more than two or three times; every governor, save one, who was looking at from Alaska to Russia — and making sure that we’re in a situation where we talk to everybody.  But it takes — the devil is in the details. 

It’s one thing to pass the American Rescue Plan.  It’s going to be another thing to implement it.  It’s going to require fastidious oversight to make sure there’s no waste or fraud, and the law does what it’s designed to do.  And I mean it: We have to get this right.  Details matter, because we have to continue to build confidence in the American people that their government can function for them and deliver. 

So there’s a lot of work for all of us left to do, but I know we’ll do it.

To every American watching: Help is here, and we will not stop working for you.  Together, with you, we are showing it’s possible to get big, important things done.  That’s what America does.  It tackles hard problems.  And how we do — you know, look, it’s how we do have it within ourselves to come out of this moment, which we’ve been saying — a lot of us have been saying for a long time, more prosperous, more united, and stronger than we went in.  That’s where we have a chance to be.  That’s what we’re going to be able to do. 

And it’s really critical — and it’s really critical to demonstrate not Democrat/Republican; it’s critical to demonstrate that government can function — can function and deliver prosperity, security, and opportunity for the people in this country. 

And as my grandfather used to kiddingly say, “With the grace of God, the goodwill of the neighbors, and the crick not rising,” that’s exactly what we’re going to do. 

