My fellow Americans: Four years ago, we launched a great national effort to rebuild our country, to renew its spirit, and to restore the allegiance of this government to its citizens.  In short, we embarked on a mission to make America great again— for all Americans.

As I conclude my term as the 45th President of the United States, I stand before you truly proud of what we have achieved together.  We did what we came here to do—and so much more.

This week, we inaugurate a new administration and pray for its success in keeping America safe and prosperous.  We extend our best wishes, and we also want them to have luck—a very important word.

I’d like to begin by thanking just a few of the amazing people who made our remarkable journey possible.

First, let me express my overwhelming gratitude for the love and support of our spectacular First Lady, Melania.  Let me also share my deepest appreciation to my daughter Ivanka, my son-in-law Jared, and to Barron, Don, Eric, Tiffany, and Lara.  You fill my world with light and with joy.

I also want to thank Vice President Mike Pence, his wonderful wife Karen, and the entire Pence family.

Thank you as well to my Chief of Staff, Mark Meadows; the dedicated members of the White House Staff and the Cabinet; and all the incredible people across our administration who poured out their heart and soul to fight for America.

I also want to take a moment to thank a truly exceptional group of people: the United States Secret Service.  My family and I will forever be in your debt.  My profound gratitude as well to everyone in the White House Military Office, the teams of Marine One and Air Force One, every member of the Armed Forces, and state and local law enforcement all across our country.



Most of all, I want to thank the American people.  To serve as your President has been an honor beyond description.  Thank you for this extraordinary privilege.  And that’s what it is—a great privilege and a great honor.

We must never forget that while Americans will always have our disagreements, we are a nation of incredible, decent, faithful, and peace-loving citizens who all want our country to thrive and flourish and be very, very successful and good.  We are a truly magnificent nation.

All Americans were horrified by the assault on our Capitol.  Political violence is an attack on everything we cherish as Americans.  It can never be tolerated.

Now more than ever, we must unify around our shared values and rise above the partisan rancor, and forge our common destiny.

Four years ago, I came to Washington as the only true outsider ever to win the presidency.  I had not spent my career as a politician, but as a builder looking at open skylines and imagining infinite possibilities.  I ran for President because I knew there were towering new summits for America just waiting to be scaled.  I knew the potential for our nation was boundless as long as we put America first.

So I left behind my former life and stepped into a very difficult arena, but an arena nevertheless, with all sorts of potential if properly done.  America had given me so much, and I wanted to give something back.

Together with millions of hardworking patriots across this land, we built the greatest political movement in the history of our country.  We also built the greatest economy in the history of the world.  It was about “America First” because we all wanted to make America great again.  We restored the principle that a nation exists to serve its citizens.  Our agenda was not about right or left, it wasn’t about Republican or Democrat, but about the good of a nation, and that means the whole nation.

With the support and prayers of the American people, we achieved more than anyone thought possible.  Nobody thought we could even come close.

We passed the largest package of tax cuts and reforms in American history.  We slashed more job-killing regulations than any administration had ever done before.  We fixed our broken trade deals, withdrew from the horrible Trans-Pacific Partnership and the impossible Paris Climate Accord, renegotiated the one-sided South Korea deal, and we replaced NAFTA with the groundbreaking USMCA—that’s Mexico and Canada—a deal that’s worked out very, very well.

Also, and very importantly, we imposed historic and monumental tariffs on China; made a great new deal with China.  But before the ink was even dry, we and the whole world got hit with the China virus.  Our trade relationship was rapidly changing, billions and billions of dollars were pouring into the U.S., but the virus forced us to go in a different direction.

The whole world suffered, but America outperformed other countries economically because of our incredible economy and the economy that we built.  Without the foundations and footings, it wouldn’t have worked out this way.  We wouldn’t have some of the best numbers we’ve ever had.

We also unlocked our energy resources and became the world’s number-one producer of oil and natural gas by far.  Powered by these policies, we built the greatest economy in the history of the world.  We reignited America’s job creation and achieved record-low unemployment for African Americans, Hispanic Americans, Asian Americans, women—almost everyone.

Incomes soared, wages boomed, the American Dream was restored, and millions were lifted from poverty in just a few short years.  It was a miracle.  The stock market set one record after another, with 148 stock market highs during this short period of time, and boosted the retirements and pensions of hardworking citizens all across our nation.  401(k)s are at a level they’ve never been at before.  We’ve never seen numbers like we’ve seen, and that’s before the pandemic and after the pandemic.

We rebuilt the American manufacturing base, opened up thousands of new factories, and brought back the beautiful phrase: “Made in the USA.”

To make life better for working families, we doubled the child tax credit and signed the largest-ever expansion of funding for childcare and development.  We joined with the private sector to secure commitments to train more than 16 million American workers for the jobs of tomorrow.

When our nation was hit with the terrible pandemic, we produced not one, but two vaccines with record-breaking speed, and more will quickly follow.  They said it couldn’t be done but we did it.  They call it a “medical miracle,” and that’s what they’re calling it right now: a “medical miracle.”

Another administration would have taken 3, 4, 5, maybe even up to 10 years to develop a vaccine.  We did in nine months.

We grieve for every life lost, and we pledge in their memory to wipe out this horrible pandemic once and for all.

When the virus took its brutal toll on the world’s economy, we launched the fastest economic recovery our country has ever seen.  We passed nearly $4 trillion in economic relief, saved or supported over 50 million jobs, and slashed the unemployment rate in half.  These are numbers that our country has never seen before.

We created choice and transparency in healthcare, stood up to big pharma in so many ways, but especially in our effort to get favored-nations clauses added, which will give us the lowest prescription drug prices anywhere in the world.

We passed VA Choice, VA Accountability, Right to Try, and landmark criminal justice reform.

We confirmed three new justices of the United States Supreme Court.  We appointed nearly 300 federal judges to interpret our Constitution as written.

For years, the American people pleaded with Washington to finally secure the nation’s borders.  I am pleased to say we answered that plea and achieved the most secure border in U.S. history.  We have given our brave border agents and heroic ICE officers the tools they need to do their jobs better than they have ever done before, and to enforce our laws and keep America safe.

We proudly leave the next administration with the strongest and most robust border security measures ever put into place.  This includes historic agreements with Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador, along with more than 450 miles of powerful new wall.

We restored American strength at home and American leadership abroad.  The world respects us again.  Please don’t lose that respect.

We reclaimed our sovereignty by standing up for America at the United Nations and withdrawing from the one-sided global deals that never served our interests.  And NATO countries are now paying hundreds of billions of dollars more than when I arrived just a few years ago.  It was very unfair.  We were paying the cost for the world.  Now the world is helping us.

And perhaps most importantly of all, with nearly $3 trillion, we fully rebuilt the American military—all made in the USA.  We launched the first new branch of the United States Armed Forces in 75 years: the Space Force.  And last spring, I stood at Kennedy Space Center in Florida and watched as American astronauts returned to space on American rockets for the first time in many, many years.

We revitalized our alliances and rallied the nations of the world to stand up to China like never before.

We obliterated the ISIS caliphate and ended the wretched life of its founder and leader, al Baghdadi.  We stood up to the oppressive Iranian regime and killed the world’s top terrorist, Iranian butcher Qasem Soleimani.

We recognized Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and recognized Israeli sovereignty over the Golan Heights.

As a result of our bold diplomacy and principled realism, we achieved a series of historic peace deals in the Middle East.  Nobody believed it could happen.  The Abraham Accords opened the doors to a future of peace and harmony, not violence and bloodshed.  It is the dawn of a new Middle East, and we are bringing our soldiers home.

I am especially proud to be the first President in decades who has started no new wars.

Above all, we have reasserted the sacred idea that, in America, the government answers to the people.  Our guiding light, our North Star, our unwavering conviction has been that we are here to serve the noble everyday citizens of America.  Our allegiance is not to the special interests, corporations, or global entities; it’s to our children, our citizens, and to our nation itself.

As President, my top priority, my constant concern, has always been the best interests of American workers and American families.  I did not seek the easiest course; by far, it was actually the most difficult.  I did not seek the path that would get the least criticism.  I took on the tough battles, the hardest fights, the most difficult choices because that’s what you elected me to do.  Your needs were my first and last unyielding focus.

This, I hope, will be our greatest legacy: Together, we put the American people back in charge of our country.  We restored self-government.  We restored the idea that in America no one is forgotten, because everyone matters and everyone has a voice.  We fought for the principle that every citizen is entitled to equal dignity, equal treatment, and equal rights because we are all made equal by God.  Everyone is entitled to be treated with respect, to have their voice heard, and to have their government listen.  You are loyal to your country, and my administration was always loyal to you.


We worked to build a country in which every citizen could find a great job and support their wonderful families.  We fought for the communities where every American could be safe and schools where every child could learn.  We promoted a culture where our laws would be upheld, our heroes honored, our history preserved, and law-abiding citizens are never taken for granted.  Americans should take tremendous satisfaction in all that we have achieved together.  It’s incredible.

Now, as I leave the White House, I have been reflecting on the dangers that threaten the priceless inheritance we all share.  As the world’s most powerful nation, America faces constant threats and challenges from abroad.  But the greatest danger we face is a loss of confidence in ourselves, a loss of confidence in our national greatness.  A nation is only as strong as its spirit.  We are only as dynamic as our pride.  We are only as vibrant as the faith that beats in the hearts of our people.

No nation can long thrive that loses faith in its own values, history, and heroes, for these are the very sources of our unity and our vitality.

What has always allowed America to prevail and triumph over the great challenges of the past has been an unyielding and unashamed conviction in the nobility of our country and its unique purpose in history.  We must never lose this conviction.  We must never forsake our belief in America.

The key to national greatness lies in sustaining and instilling our shared national identity.  That means focusing on what we have in common: the heritage that we all share.

At the center of this heritage is also a robust belief in free expression, free speech, and open debate.  Only if we forget who we are, and how we got here, could we ever allow political censorship and blacklisting to take place in America.  It’s not even thinkable.  Shutting down free and open debate violates our core values and most enduring traditions.

In America, we don’t insist on absolute conformity or enforce rigid orthodoxies and punitive speech codes.  We just don’t do that.  America is not a timid nation of tame souls who need to be sheltered and protected from those with whom we disagree.  That’s not who we are.  It will never be who we are.

For nearly 250 years, in the face of every challenge, Americans have always summoned our unmatched courage, confidence, and fierce independence.  These are the miraculous traits that once led millions of everyday citizens to set out across a wild continent and carve out a new life in the great West.  It was the same profound love of our God-given freedom that willed our soldiers into battle and our astronauts into space.

As I think back on the past four years, one image rises in my mind above all others.  Whenever I traveled all along the motorcade route, there were thousands and thousands of people.  They came out with their families so that they could stand as we passed, and proudly wave our great American flag.  It never failed to deeply move me.  I knew that they did not just come out to show their support of me; they came out to show me their support and love for our country.

This is a republic of proud citizens who are united by our common conviction that America is the greatest nation in all of history.  We are, and must always be, a land of hope, of light, and of glory to all the world.  This is the precious inheritance that we must safeguard at every single turn.

For the past four years, I have worked to do just that.  From a great hall of Muslim leaders in Riyadh to a great square of Polish people in Warsaw; from the floor of the Korean Assembly to the podium at the United Nations General Assembly; and from the Forbidden City in Beijing to the shadow of Mount Rushmore, I fought for you, I fought for your family, I fought for our country.  Above all, I fought for America and all it stands for—and that is safe, strong, proud, and free.

Now, as I prepare to hand power over to a new administration at noon on Wednesday, I want you to know that the movement we started is only just beginning.  There’s never been anything like it.  The belief that a nation must serve its citizens will not dwindle but instead only grow stronger by the day.

As long as the American people hold in their hearts deep and devoted love of country, then there is nothing that this nation cannot achieve.  Our communities will flourish.  Our people will be prosperous.  Our traditions will be cherished.  Our faith will be strong.  And our future will be brighter than ever before.

I go from this majestic place with a loyal and joyful heart, an optimistic spirit, and a supreme confidence that for our country and for our children, the best is yet to come.

Thank you, and farewell.  God bless you.  God bless the United States of America.



Thank you very much.  Thank you, everybody.  Great honor to be here.  We worked long and hard.  Please sit down.  We’ve worked long and hard to get this done.  They said it couldn’t be done, and we got it done.  One of the largest infrastructure projects in the history of our country.

I’m honored to be here in the Rio Grande Valley with the courageous men and women of Customs and Border Patrol.  These people are incredible.  They’re really incredible.  I’ve gotten to know you very well over the last four years.  Many of you are friends from all of the work we did in designing the wall.  We got it exactly as you wanted it — everything — including your protective plate on top.  I’d say, “Why did we put that?”  And they said, “We need it for extra protection.”  Climb plate.  And we have everything you want.  It’s steel.  It’s concrete inside the steel.  And then it’s rebar — a lot of heavy rebar inside the concrete.  And it’s as strong as you’re going to get and strong as you can have.  But we gave you 100 percent of what you wanted.  So now you have no excuses.  I didn’t want you to have any excuses.  (Laughter.)

And you set records.  And we can’t let the next administration even think about taking it down, if you can believe that.  I don’t think that will happen.  I think when you see what it does and how it’s so important for our country, nobody is going to be touching it.  And you are very proud of it, and you’re proud of the work you did, because we really designed it together.

We’re joined together to celebrate a great achievement: the extraordinarily successful building of the wall on the southern border.

Before we begin, I’d like to say that free speech is under assault like never before.  The 25th Amendment is of zero risk to me but will come back to haunt Joe Biden and the Biden administration.  As the expression goes: Be careful what you wish for.  The impeachment hoax is a continuation of the greatest and most vicious witch hunt in the history of our country, and it is causing tremendous anger and division and pain — far greater than most people will ever understand, which is very dangerous for the USA, especially at this very tender time.

And now I’d like to briefly address the events of last week.  Millions of our citizens watched on Wednesday as a mob stormed the Capitol and trashed the halls of government.  As I have consistently said throughout my administration, we believe in respecting America’s history and traditions, not tearing them down.  We believe in the rule of law, not in violence or rioting.

Because of the pandemic — horrible, horrible invisible enemy — and despite our tremendous success developing a vaccine years before it was thought evenly remotely possible.  Nobody thought it was going to be possible.  They said would take five years.  “Sir, it will take seven years.”  All of our scientists were saying — our advisors, “It will take 7 years, 5 years, 10 years maybe.”  Well, we did it just like I said we would.  And we had it out years and years before they thought it was possible.  And we’re now delivering it to states, including your state, where your governor and government are doing a terrific job in getting it administered in Texas.  And Florida is doing great.  Some of them are doing great.  Some aren’t doing as well, but they have all they can handle.  And we get it to them as fast as they need it, and even faster.

But they’re calling it a “medical miracle.”  And this has been a difficult year and a very difficult election.  The pandemic has made it a very, very difficult year for our country and virtually every country all over the world.

Now is the time for our nation to heal, and it’s time for peace and for calm.  Respect for law enforcement and the great people within law enforcement — so many are here — is the foundation of the MAGA agenda.  And we’re a nation of law, and we’re a nation of order.  That is why we’re here today, to talk about what we must do to uphold the rule of law in America and how we must continue to support our law enforcement heroes, which is exactly what you are.  Do you feel like a hero?  Yeah, I think you do.  Right?  (Applause.)  You do and you are.

I want to thank Customs and Border Patrol Commissioner Mark Morgan, who’s been incredible.  Where is Mark?  Mark?  Stand up, Mark.  Great job.  Fantastic.  (Applause.)

Chief Patrol Agent Brian Hastings.  Brian, thank you very much.  Great job.  (Applause.)  He’s so happy with it.  He said, “Sir, this really works.”

And most importantly, the brave law enforcement officers who risk their lives every day to protect our families and our country.

I also want to thank a tremendous gentleman, a friend of mine, Tom Homan.  He’s a great American patriot, and he was with us right from the beginning.  (Applause.)  Right, Tom?  You knew exactly — he said, “We need a wall,” when they were saying, “No, no, we need drones.  We need drones.”  I said, “Why?  So you can watch the people pour into our country illegally?”  And I want to thank you very much, Tom.  What a — what a professional job you’ve done.

All of you people, incredible.  Everyone here today is part of an incredible success story.  This is a real success story.

When I took office, we inherited a broken, dysfunctional, and open border.  Everybody was pouring in at will.

Working alongside the heroes in this great outdoor space, looking at our wall, we reformed our immigration system and achieved the most secure southern border in U.S. history.  It is at a level that it’s never been before.

We took on the cartels, the coyotes, and the special interests, and we restored the rule of law.  For years, politicians ran for office promising to secure the border, only to get elected and to do the absolute exact opposite.  They even promised a wall.  If you remember, about 10 years ago, they promised a wall but they couldn’t get it built.  It wasn’t easy getting it built.  Getting it financed was tough.  Getting it built was even tougher.  All the different chains of title and all the different things we had to go through — very, very complex and very difficult, but we got it done.  But they had it years ago.  You remember that better than anybody.  Right?  And they never got it done.  They never, ever completed the task.  And then, ultimately, the money was sent back to the federal government.  Spent, but no wall was built.

But unlike those who came before me, I kept my promises.  And today we celebrate an extraordinary milestone: the completion of the promised 450 miles of border wall.  Four hundred and fifty miles.  Nobody realizes how big that is.  (Applause.)

I remember when I first came down, about a year and a half ago: We’re under construction, and I started walking, and I’m looking at the wall, and I’m walking and walking.  And I’m used to, like, a development project where you could walk a wall.  You know, 10 acres, 5 acres, 2 acres, 1 acre.  Then I realized that’s a long time; that’s a big walk.  A lot of it — a lot of the wall you have is incredibly natural.  It’s — you have the mountains.  You have the rivers.  You have some very powerful water areas.  You have some areas that are virtually impossible to get by.  So we didn’t need walls everywhere, but where we needed them — because it’s been so successful that we’ve added nearly 300 miles.  And that’s currently under construction.  This was our original wish: to get these areas done where it was such trouble.  And now we have it.  It’s either in construction or pre-construction — an additional 300 miles.

In every region that we’ve built the wall, illegal crossings and drug smuggling have plummeted.  Absolutely plummeted.  In the Rio Grande Valley, crossings have dropped nearly 80 percent.  In Yuma, Arizona, illegal entries have been slashed by 90 percent.  Nationwide, ICE and Border Patrol have seized over 2 million pounds of fentanyl, heroin, meth, and other deadly narcotics, saving thousands and thousands of lives.

We’ve arrested nearly 500,000 illegal aliens with criminal records — some with very serious criminal records of the type you don’t want to know about, like murder.

We removed nearly 20,000 gang members from the United States, including 4,500 members of MS-13 — probably the worst gang of them all.  Through the landmark reforms we’ve put into place, we have ended the immigration chaos and reestablished American sovereignty.  Our most important reform was ending catch and release — not easy to do; you’re dealing with Congress; it’s very, very difficult — which is the functional equivalent of open borders, but even worse: It’s catch and release them.  It means release into our country, not into another country.

This policy was exploited by vicious criminal organizations, who understood the laws better than our people understood them for years, to spread misery and suffering and drugs all across the hemisphere.

Now, instead of “catch and release,” we have “detain and remove.”  It’s called “detain and remove.”  Doesn’t that sound better?  One of the biggest loopholes we closed was asylum fraud.  Under the old, broken system, if you merely requested asylum, you were released into the country.  The most ridiculous thing anyone has ever seen.  And we were taking in some people that you didn’t want to have in your country.

We instituted a series of historic policy changes to shut down asylum fraud, and that’s what we did.  This includes the groundbreaking agreement with Mexico known as the “Migrant Protection Protocols,” or MPP.

Under this agreement, if an illegal alien requests asylum, they have to wait in Mexico until their case is heard.  They used to wait here.  And when they were waiting, they would say “bye-bye,” and they’d disappear somewhere into our country, and essentially we’d never find them again, would never see them again.

This one measure alone ended a humanitarian crisis and saved countless lives, and especially, I have to say, lives from crime.

I want to thank the great President of Mexico.  He is a great gentleman, a friend of mine.  And President Obrador — he is a man who really knows what’s happening.  And he loves his country, and he also loves the United States.  But I want to thank for his friendship and his professional working relationship.

We actually had 27,000 Mexican soldiers guarding our borders over the last two years.  Nobody thought that was possible.  And they made it very, very difficult, and that’s why the numbers were able to plunge, even during the construction of the wall.

And, by the way, one of the big elements of the wall that make it so successful is we can have far fewer people working.  Now, they can be working on other things — other things related to crime and drug prevention and a lot of other elements they’re working on, because we saved massive numbers of people.  And included here we have the most sophisticated camera systems and most sophisticated electronic systems anywhere in the world.

We implemented three historic agreements with the Northern Triangle; that’s Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador.  Under these critical asylum cooperation agreements, the burden of illegal immigration is now shared all across the region.  Now, when an illegal immigrant is arrested at our border, they can be sent to a neighboring country instead of into a U.S. community.

Prior to my getting here, countries wouldn’t accept them.  They would say, “No, no, no.”  I said, “Well, you got to take them.”  First month — I’ll never forget — these gentlemen, right here, came to me.  They said, “They won’t take them back.”

They came.  They may be murderers.  They may be cartel heads.  They may be some really vicious people.  The countries didn’t want them back.  And I stopped all payments to those countries.  I stopped everything going to those countries.  And after it was stopped for about a month — you remember? — after it was stopped for about a month, they called.  They said, “We’d love to have them back.”  And I never gave them as much money as they were getting, by the way, but they got some.  (Applause.) It was amazing.

And you people know better than anyone: They wouldn’t take them back.  We’d have planes flying over, loaded up with people that we didn’t want here.  And they’d say, “Don’t ever even think about landing that plane.”  And they’d take them by boat, and they’d take them by bus, and they wouldn’t let them into their countries.  And all of a sudden, they say, “Welcome back.  We love having you.”

So it was a great thing.  And now they do take them back.  And the relationship with those countries — the Triangle — the relationship is a much better one than it was before.

In addition to our agreements with Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador, we have systematically reformed the regulatory code to return asylum to its original legal meaning and purpose — not a free ticket for entry.

A recent comprehensive report by the Department of Homeland Security and Justice show how effective our reforms have been and how disastrous their removal would be.  It would be a disaster for our country.  I know they’re thinking about removing them.  I hope they don’t do that.  I hope they don’t do that.  It’ll be a absolute travesty for our country.

The report conclusively proves, once and for all, that aliens released at the border remain at large in the country and do not return home.  They won’t go home.  And you rarely find them.  It’s very tough to find them.

So we have aliens released in our country, many of whom are serious criminals.  And we’ve stopped that.  Don’t ever start that process again.  By contrast, under our policies, 98 percent of aliens that remain in DHS custody are removed.  Simply put, if you enter the United States illegally, you are apprehended and immediately safely removed from our country.  Without this core principle, there is no border, there is no law, there is no order.

My administration also instituted vital public health measures on the border.  In response to the China virus, under Title 42 of the U.S. Code, illegal immigrants are being promptly removed to protect the health of border agents, other migrants, and local communities, and the public at large.  Removing these protections would invite a public health catastrophe of epic proportions.

As you probably know, in Tijuana, various parts of Mexico, the COVID — it’s got about 24 names I can call it, from “COVID” to “China virus.”  I can call it the “plague.”  I call it the “China plague.”  A lot of different names.  But we always call it the “invisible enemy.”  But the invisible enemy has been very tough on Mexico, and we have areas along the border where we’re in great shape because right there, because of that, that we’re in great shape.  But on the other side, in Mexico, they’re suffering greatly with the virus.  It’s been incredible what we’ve achieved.  And we didn’t do the wall because of COVID; we did the wall because of security and drugs and other things.  But it turned out that, in the middle of it all, along came this horrible plague.

We inherited a dangerously lawless border.  The people that work here are unbelievably brave.  I’ve seen what they have to endure, what they have to go through.  They’re tough, they’re strong, and they’re great patriots, great Americans.

We fixed it and we secured it.  We empowered our wonderful ICE and Border Patrol to fulfill their oaths and sworn officers.  They became sworn officers of the law.  And they love their job.  It’s a tough job.  It’s a nasty job.  They’re not paid what they should be paid, to be honest, but we got you up.  We got you up.  But these are incredibly talented people that could probably do a lot better, in terms of economics, than they do here.  But they love what they do, and they love their country.

We also put into place vital measures to protect American workers, keep out terrorists, and stop the abuse of our welfare system — where they’d come up, go on our welfare system, and live for years on American welfare without ever having a job.

We also have, and we had — but we have them all the time — we have terrorists from the Middle East coming into our country through the southern border.  That was before what you see right here, because it was easier to come into our country through the southern border than it was through airports or any other means.  So they’d land in South America, and they’d work their way up, and they’d come into our country.  And these are not people from the countries that you would suspect.  These are people from some very seriously dangerous places in the Middle East.  And the numbers are far greater than anybody would understand.  Really far greater.

Removing any of these measures would hamstring our workers, endanger our country, and cost taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars a year.

No matter our party, we should all agree on the need to protect our workers, our families, and our citizens of all backgrounds, no matter who they are.  In particular, if our border security measures are reversed, it will trigger a tidal wave of illegal immigration — a wave like you’ve never seen before.  And I can tell you that, already, waves are starting to come up from 2,000 and 1,000 and 500 miles away.  We see what’s coming.

And they’re coming because they think that it’s gravy train at the end; it’s going to be a gravy train.  Change the name from the “caravans,” which I think we came up with, to the “gravy train,” because that’s what they’re looking for — looking for the gravy.

This will be an unmitigated calamity for national security, public safety, and public health.  It would destroy millions and millions of jobs and claim thousands of innocent lives.  The policies I put into place are uniformly and strongly supported by the men and women of ICE and Border Patrol.  We worked on them together, just like we did on the wall.  We worked on the policies together because nobody knows this whole world better than the incredible people right in front of me.  To terminate those policies is knowingly to put America in really serious danger and to override the great career experts that have worked so hard — those from DHS.

At this very moment, smugglers and coyotes are preparing to surge the border if our policies are loosened or removed.  I mean, they’re literally waiting — big, big groups of people.  Some of them very unsavory, I might add.

This is an entirely preventable tragedy.  It’s waiting to happen.  The safety of our nation must come before politics.  We have many disagreements in the country, but we should all agree: the urgent need to secure our borders, protect our homeland, and allow law enforcement to fulfill its mission without political interference.

ICE and Border Patrol agents swore a sacred oath to uphold the law, and no political appointee should ever order them to violate that oath.  These are real experts.  They really get it.

And I’ll tell you who else gets it: The Hispanic population of our country gets it.  Because not only did I win Texas in historic numbers, but I won border towns, which are largely Hispanic, and people were amazed to see that.  And the numbers, they say, were — the Governor of Texas called — Greg — great guy, great governor — called.  He said, “You had numbers that nobody has had since Reconstruction.  “Reconstruction” means “Civil War.”  And largely Hispanic.  They understand it better than anybody, and they want law enforcement to help them — help them live safe lives.

The laws that Congress passed must be upheld.  To the men and women of ICE, Customs and Border Protection, and all across DHS, law enforcement in general: You have earned the everlasting gratitude of our nation.  You have no idea how much our nation loves you and respects you.  I don’t think you do have an idea, but it’s true.  I only hope and pray that your voice will be heard, honored, heeded, and respected long into the future.

God bless you.  God bless law enforcement.  And God bless America.  Thank you very much.  Thank you.  Great job.



Thank you very much. Please. (Applause).
Thank you very much. Appreciate it very much.

I’m honored to welcome doctors, scientists, industry executives, and state and local leaders to our historic Operation Warp Speed Vaccine Summit. It’s been some journey for all of us. It’s been an incredible success.

We’re grateful to be joined by Vice President Mike Pence, who has done an absolutely incredible job on the Coronavirus Task Force. Mike, thank you. Stand up, Mike. (Applause.) Great job.

We’re here to discuss a monumental national achievement. From the instant the coronavirus invaded our shores, we raced into action to develop a safe and effective vaccine at breakneck speed. It would normally take five years, six years, seven years, or even more. In order to achieve this goal, we harnessed the full power of government, the genius of American scientists, and the might of American industry to save millions and millions of lives all over the world. We’re just days away from authorization from the FDA, and we’re pushing them hard, at which point we will immediately begin mass distribution.

Before Operation Warp Speed, the typical timeframe for development and approval, as you know, could be infinity. And we were very, very happy that we were able to get things done at a level that nobody has ever seen before. The gold standard vaccine has been done in less than nine months.

On behalf of the entire nation, I want to thank everyone here today who has been involved in this extraordinary American initiative. I also want to recognize members of my administration who have worked tirelessly in this effort:

Alex Azar. Please, Alex. Where’s Alex? Thank you, Alex. Great job. (Applause.)

Moncef Slaoui. Where are you, Moncef? Thank you very much. Great job. (Applause.)

A man who’s now going to be very important, General Gus Perna. I have no doubt about it, right? (Applause.) Logistics.

Jared Kushner. He’s worked so hard. Where’s Jared? Jared, wherever you may be. Thank you. Thank you, Jared. (Applause.)

Dr. Deborah Birx. Deborah? Thank you very much, Deborah. (Applause.)

Admiral Brett Giroir. Where is Brett? (Applause.) Great job you’ve been doing, Brett.

Surgeon General Jerome Adams. (Applause.) Jerome, thank you very much. Terrific.

Dr. Robert Redfield. (Applause.) Robert, thank you very much. Appreciate it.

Administrator Seema Verma. Seema? Thank you. (Applause.)
Dr. Peter Marks. Peter? Where’s Peter? Thank you. (Applause.)
Paul Mango, Adam Boehler, and Brad Smith — thank you very much. Great job. (Applause.) Thank you all very much. Incredible job. And many others, also. Many, many others.

We’re also grateful to be joined by Governors Greg Abbott. Where’s Greg? (Applause.) Bill Lee. Bill? (Applause.) Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, Bill. Ron DeSantis. Ron? (Applause.) Thank you, Ron. Thank you. Thank you very much. Great job, Ron. And John Bel Edwards. John Bel. Thank you. (Applause.) Thank you, John Bel. Thank you very much.

As well as Senator John Barrasso, who is a fantastic doctor, also, by the way, I have to say. (Applause.) When we — when I need info on that subject, I call up John. Thank you, John, very much.

Senator Steve Daines. Congratulations on a great win. Great win. (Applause.) That was easier than you thought, it turned out, right? It was a little easier than you thought. Great going. We’re proud of you.

Congressman Greg Walden. Greg, thank you very much. (Applause.) Thank you very much.

And Congressman Brad Wenstrup. Thank you, Brad. (Applause.) Great job. And many, many others.

My administration provided a total of $14 billion to accelerate vaccine development and to manufacture all of the top candidates in advance — long in advance.

As a result of this unprecedented investment, we are exceedingly proud that both Pfizer and Moderna have announced that their vaccines are approximately 95 percent effective, which is a number that nobody expected to be able to get to, far exceeding anything that really we — that anybody thought. We went out and we said, “What do you think a maximum would be?” And I think doctors — we all came up to the conclusion that something like that would be really incredible.

And we have other candidates looking right now. We have some big ones that we’re going to be announcing very soon. We have some companies — great, great companies out there you all know about: Johnson & Johnson and — and others. And they’re all coming in, and they’re coming in very quickly. We expect to have some news on that very shortly. And we have worked very well with the companies, but if for any reason we have any problems, we will be instituting the Defense Production Act, and we will make sure that we don’t have any problems for very long. We’ve instituted it before.

Two additional companies, AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson — as you know, the Johnson & Johnson is a one-dose, one-shot vaccine, so we’re going to see how that works. That would be very helpful if that all came out, and I think it probably will. Also, they’re showing tremendous — tremendous promise, all of them. Tremendous prob- —

We’re — we’re very hopeful that the FDA will authorize the Pfizer vaccine within days. We got to get it moving. And Moderna vaccine almost immediately thereafter. Large numbers of tests and samples have been done, so hopefully that’ll go very quickly.

If authorized, tens of millions of vaccine doses will be available this month. And we’ll get it distributed very quickly. We have that all set. And hundreds of millions more will quickly follow.

Every American who wants the vaccine will be able to get the vaccine. And we think by spring we’re going to be in a position that nobody would have believed possible just a few months ago. (Applause.) Yeah. Amazing. Really amazing. They say it’s — they say it’s somewhat of a miracle, and I think that’s true.

The plan we put forward prioritizes the elderly and patients with underlying conditions, as well as healthcare workers and first responders.

The ultimate decision rests with the governors of the various states — and I hope the governors make wise decisions — who will decide where the vaccines will go in their state and who will get them first. We urge the governors to put America’s seniors first, and also, I think those who work with seniors, which obviously you’re going to have to do that. I think they have to go together. And doctors, nurses, first responders, et cetera.

This will quickly and dramatically reduce deaths and hospitalizations. And within a short period of time, I think we want to get back to normal. A very standard phrase. We want to just get back to normal, get back to where we were a little more than nine months ago. We were doing incredibly. And in many respects, we’re still doing incredibly with our stock markets and everything else, which are hitting all new highs.

We’ve already finalized a partnership with Walgreens and CVS, whose executives join us today. Thank you very much for being here. Thank you very much. We appreciate it very much. (Applause.) And they will deliver vaccines directly to nursing homes as soon as the states request that they do so.

Later today, General Gus Perna will outline the detailed plan to rapidly distribute the vaccine to every state, territory, and tribe. States have designated over 50,000 sites that will receive the vaccine. We’ve worked very closely with the states. Actually, we’ve had very good relationships with the governors — I almost think all of the governors — at least in those conference calls that are somewhat secret, other than sometimes on occasion, Mike, the press will break in, which is fine too. (Laughter.)

It’s amazing how you leave those rooms and about 10 seconds later — there wasn’t even time for a leak — they were on the call. (Laughter.) But that’s all right. So you assume that. You always assume that. But they’ll be going through pharmacies, hospitals, healthcare providers.

Through our partnership with FedEx, UPS, and McKesson, we’ll ship doses from warehouses directly to the designated sites. And we’re thrilled to be joined by representatives of those, really, great American companies. Those companies have worked with us, and they’ve been incredible to work with. And I want to thank you all for being here. Please, thank you very much. (Applause.) Thank you. Thank you very much.

As I’ve stated all along — and I guess as you saw pretty vividly. I heard about the — I heard about what they — we’re going to show prior to my coming. You saw that very few people thought that this was possible. Of course, they’ll be saying now, “We always told you it was so.” But we have them saying a little bit different.

But it has been incredible. And it will end the pandemic. It will end the pandemic. And we’re working with other nations. As you see actually by looking at your screen today, we’re working very closely with other nations also to get the vaccines out to other nations. And that’s very important. We work with the world. We’re working with the world. We have great companies, and we’re working with the world.

In just a few minutes, I’ll sign an executive order to ensure that the United States government prioritizes the getting out of the vaccine to American citizens before sending it to other nations.

Now, if necessary, I told you, we’ll invoke the Defense Production Act, but we don’t think it will be necessary. If it is — it’s a very powerful act, as you know, because we’ve used it very, very successfully.

While we begin to swiftly deploy the vaccine, we’ll continue to expand the availability of groundbreaking therapies. Since April, advances in treatments have already helped reduce the mortality rate by 85 percent. Think of that: 85 percent. (Applause.) It’s an incredible number.

I’ve delivered on my solemn promise to make the antibody treatments — they’re brilliant; they’re highly successful — available to every American, and we’re doing that free of cost — totally free of cost. So we’re making them available, and they’re available now. And if somebody gets sick, it works, where they go and they get treatment if that’s what the doctors are prescribing. And it’s been incredible, the success.

And when you hear 85 percent, that’s some number. To me, that’s a number that goes along with anything else, including the vaccines, when you think about it. As well as we’ve done with the vaccines, when you hear “85 percent,” people — people find that one hard to believe. But you look at the stats, and you see what’s happening.

And you look at other countries; they’re having tremendous difficulties in Europe — tremendous. Beyond — relatively beyond what we’re having. They’re having them all over the world.

But this will vanquish the — the problem, this horrible scourge — as I call it, the “China virus,” because that’s where it came from.

The virus has really been looked at and studied all over the world, and our scientists, our industrial and economic mobilization has been like nobody else in the world could have done. And it’s very important that we share that with others and other nations.

I’ve worked and invoked the Defense Production Act over 100 times to manufacture essential supplies in the United States. Despite the grim projections from the media eight months ago, where they said this was impossible — they actually said — and you saw that a little bit, but I could give you two hours’ worth of it. But they said it will never happen; you could never do it; it was a pipe dream. But we — we did something that nobody thought was possible.

And we also did it where no American who has needed a ventilator has been denied a ventilator. When we — when this first came out, we weren’t equipped for that. Nobody was equipped for that. And we’re now making ventilators. And we have all we need in this country, but we’re sending them to countries all over the world. We’re making thousands and thousands of ventilators a month.

The United States has also created the largest, most advanced, and most innovative testing program in the world by far. We’ve conducted over 200 million tests. Think of that: 200 million tests — more than all of the European Union combined. It’s not even close.

Just 10 months ago, none of these innovations even existed. The tremendous progress that we’ve made is a testament to what our nation is capable of. When America is faced with a challenge, we come through — and we always come through — to overcome every hardship and surmount every obstacle. And I think you’ll be seeing that over the next few months; the numbers should skyrocket downward.

We are the most exceptional nation in the history of the world. Today, we’re on the verge of another American medical miracle. And that’s what people are saying. People that aren’t necessarily big fans of Donald Trump are saying, “Whether you like him or not, this is one of the greatest miracles in the history of modern-day medicine” or any other medicine — any other age of medicine.

American companies were the first to produce a verifiably safe and effective vaccine. Together, we will defeat the virus, and we will soon end the pandemic, and we will save millions and millions of lives, both in our country and all over the world. And we’ve already started.

Thank you again to every person here today and for the incredible achievements that you’ve done. You’re going to be very proud of this day, and you’re going to be very proud of this period of time because nobody thought this was possible. Nobody thought it was even remotely possible to do what we’ve done in a period of less than nine months — something that — just not even thinkable.

And we took a lot of heat when we said this is our goal, and we, frankly, weren’t even quite using the numbers that we used. We far exceeded what we thought. If we would have said “sometime next year,” I think most people would have said, “That would be great. That would be a miracle.” But we did it long before sometime next year.

So now I want to ask several leaders who have been crucial in this effort to join me on stage as I sign the executive order to ensure that American citizens have first priority to receive American vaccines. And then we’re going to be working with other countries all over the world, and I think we’ll be able to start doing that almost immediately also, because we have millions of doses coming in.

So thank you very much. Thank you. It’s a great honor.


Well, thank you very much. Please. And I just want to congratulate everybody. The Dow Jones Industrial Average just broke, for the first time in history, 30,000. It’s now — (applause) — that’s good. That’s great for jobs, and it’s good for everything. And this is the ninth time that we set a record during the course of 2020, and it’s the 48th time that we’ve set the record during the Trump administration. And there’s never been anything like that. So I just want to congratulate everybody that worked so hard: the White House, but maybe most importantly, the people of our country. It’s a tremendous achievement.

The First Lady and I are thrilled to welcome you all to the beautiful Rose Garden where the First Lady actually worked very hard on renovating it. It was 61 years — it was in rough shape. Very big job, actually, when you go to the wires underground. People have no idea how complex it is, but you’ve done a fantastic job. Thank you very much. (Applause.)

And we’re also very happy to have with us my daughter, Ivanka, and Jared and Theodore, Arabella, and Joseph. Thank you very much for coming. (Applause.) They like the turkey. Thank you very much.

On behalf of the entire Trump family, I want to wish every American a healthy and very happy Thanksgiving. We’re here today to continue a beloved annual tradition: the official presidential pardon of a very, very fortunate turkey, because Thanksgiving is a special day for turkeys — I guess, probably for the most part, not a very good one when you think about it. The first turkey to dodge the White House dinner table received unofficial clemency when President Abraham Lincoln’s son, Tad, begged his father to spare his new friend.

For the past 73 years, the National Turkey Federation has presented the National Thanksgiving Turkey to the President. Starting under President George H.W. Bush, these birds have received a formal pardon every single year.

Today, it is my honor to present to you this year’s lucky bird, Corn, and, just in case we needed him, Cob. Corn and Cob. That’s not too hard to remember, is it?

These two magnificent gobblers were selected from the official presidential flock of 30 turkeys, some real beauties. They were raised by the Chairman of the National Turkey Federation himself, Ron Kardel. Ron — thank you very much, Ron. Please, stand up. Great job. (Applause.) Ron, thank you for being here, and your family — beautiful family. Thank you very much for being here. Appreciate it.

Like so many presidential flocks, this one started in the great state of Iowa in what can only been described as an act of blatant pandering. And, by the way, I love the state of Iowa.

These two turkeys sought to win the support of Iowans across the state by naming themselves Corn and Cob. After today’s ceremony, these birds will retire under the care of skilled veterinarians at Iowa State University, a tremendous university in Ames.

Once there, people of all ages will be able to visit them and learn about poultry science, veterinary medicine, and the noble American tradition of farming. We love our farmers, I’ll tell you. (Applause.) And we hope and we know that’s going to happen — that Corn and Cob have a very long, happy, and memorable life.

This year, our nation commemorates the 400th anniversary of the pilgrims landing on Plymouth Rock. After arriving in the New World, the brave men and women of the Mayflower endured a bitter and dangerous winter — very, very dangerous winter. Many were sick, most were starving, and all were praying for a miracle. Thankfully, God heard their prayers.

From our earliest days, America has always been a story of perseverance and triumph, determination and strength, loyalty and faith. This week, in a time that is very unusual but in so many ways, very, very good — what we’ve endured and been able to endure, with the vaccines now coming out one after another. It’s an incredible thing that happened. One of the greatest medical achievements that this planet has ever seen.

But it’s time to remember that we live in a great, great country — the greatest of them all. And there’s nothing even close, as far as I’m concerned.

Every American can be united in thanksgiving to God for the incredible gifts he has bestowed upon us: the blessings of family, community, and this exceptional, beautiful, and great country. It’s greater than ever before.

During this Thanksgiving, we extend our eternal gratitude to the doctors, nurses, healthcare workers, and scientists who have waged the battle against the China virus, and we give thanks for the vaccines and therapies that will soon end the pandemic. It’s just — just such a tremendous feeling to know that they’re coming, and they’ll be coming probably starting next week, or shortly thereafter.

We send our love to every member of the armed forces and the law enforcement heroes risking their lives to keep America safe, to keep America great, and, as I say, “America first.” Shouldn’t go away from that: America first. (Applause.)

We give thanks to the priceless freedoms that we’ve inherited, and we ask God to watch over and protect our nation and its people during this incredible holiday and in all of the years to come. We ask that of God.

Once again, Melania and I wish to thank everybody for your incredible courtesies and also wish you a Happy Thanksgiving.

And now it’s time for the moment of our guests of honor. They’ve been waiting, and, in this case, he’s been waiting for this. And bring them out. Look at that beautiful, beautiful bird. Oh, so lucky. That is a lucky bird.

Corn, I hereby grant you a full pardon. Thank you, Corn. What a bird. (Applause.) Thank you.


Thank you very much. This is a very big announcement — the biggest ever, concerning drugs and drug pricing. So, today, I have to tell you it’s a great honor for me to announce that my administration is issuing two groundbreaking rules to very dramatically lower the price of prescription drugs for the American people, especially for our cherished seniors.

We’re pleased to be joined on this occasion by Secretary of Health and Human Services Alex Azar, and Administrator of the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Seema Verma. Thank you both. Thank you both. And thank you all for being here. Appreciate it.

The unprecedented reforms we’re completing today are the direct result of the historic drug pricing executive orders I signed in July. Statutorily, we had to go through a very long process, and we got it done. I was very proud to have gotten this done. We were pushing it very hard, as we did with the vaccines and other things.

The first action will save American seniors billions of dollars by preventing middlemen — the famous middlemen, they call them — from ripping off Medicare patients with high prescription prices.

Currently, drug companies provide large discounts on the price of prescription medicines, including nearly $40 billion in rebates to Medicare Part D plans last year alone. Yet often, middlemen stop those discounts from going to the patients — which is what we’re interested in; not the middlemen — who need it the most. So the patients are going to be now getting the benefit, instead of these very wealthy individuals.

Patients pay very high prices, and they have for many years — although we brought it down; first time in 51 years — with the costs adding up to hundreds or even thousands of dollars per year, per patient.

Today’s action ends this injustice and requires that these discounts go directly to the people. These are the people that need it. This will save patients up to 30 percent. It could be 40 percent, could be 50 percent, could be much higher than that. These are numbers that nobody has ever even contemplated, and that doesn’t include lifesaving drugs like insulin, which will be even higher. Insulin was destroying lives and destroying families because the cost was so high, and now it’s at a level that nobody can even believe.

Thirty-five dollars a month from many times that number.

The second rule we are finalizing today will transform the way the U.S. government pays for drugs to end global freeloading on the backs of American citizens and American patients.

Until now, Americans have often been charged more than twice as much for the exact same drug as other medically advanced countries. We would be having a drug — identical drug, same company — and we’d pay many times the price of what that drug would sell for in certain countries.

In case after case, our citizens pay massively higher prices than other nations pay for the same exact pill, from the same factory, effectively subsidizing socialism aboard [abroad] with skyrocketing prices at home. So we would spend tremendous amounts of money in order to provide inexpensive drugs to another country. And when I say the price is different, you can see some examples where the price is beyond anything — four times, five times different.

For example, Medicare Part B recipients are forced to spend five times more for a common breast cancer medication than patients in other countries. So, five times more. And we have other examples that are substantially higher than that.

To address this unfairness and to lower prices for Americans, we’re finalizing the Most Favored Nation rule. Remember that name. Most Favored Nation rule. Nobody has ever done this. The drug companies don’t like me too much, but we had to do it. It took a long time before we were able to do this because, statutorily, we had to go through a process. But they’ll — there’ll never be anything like this. I just hope they keep it. I hope they have the courage to keep it, because the powerful drug lobby — big pharma — is putting pressure on people like you wouldn’t believe.

Medicare will now look at the price that other developed nations pay for their drugs. And instead of paying the highest price on that list — and we are substantially higher than any other country in the world — we will pay the lowest price. In other words, we take the lowest price, and we match whatever the lowest price is, leading to colossal savings for all Americans. And we’re talking about savings of 50, 60, 70 percent, 80 percent — different drugs, different prices.

In addition, today, we’re taking one more historic action to hold down drug prices. In the past, drug companies have been allowed to identify certain very old generic drugs that have been widely available for decades and exploit a misguided program called “Unapproved Drugs Initiative — that’s “Unapproved Drugs Initiative,” a program that has been around for a long time and hasn’t been too good for the people that were supposed to benefit — to obtain market exclusivity on these medicines.

So we are doing something that nobody thought anybody would do. The savings is going to be incredible. Then they’ve jacked up the prices by as much as 1,000 to 5,000 percent on this product. This program has also caused shortages of important medicines.

Today, I am announcing that we are ending the Unapproved Drugs Initiative program to put a stop to this unfair practice. So prices are lifted by 1,000 percent to 5,000 percent. In one or two cases, even more than that. And we’re ending this. We are putting an end to it.

Together, these reforms will save American patients many, many billions of dollars every single year. For generations, the American people have been abused by big pharma and their army of lawyers, lobbyists, and bought-and-paid-for politicians. But I’ve [never] been loyal to the special interests; I have been loyal to our patients and our people that need drugs — prescription drugs — and devoted myself completely to fighting for the American people. You see that. This is not an easy thing to do.

Big pharma ran millions of dollars of negative advertisements against me during the campaign — which I won, by the way. But, you know, we’ll find that out. Almost 74 million votes. We had big pharma against us. We had the media against us. We had big tech against us. We had a lot of dishonesty against us.

But big pharma alone ran millions and millions of dollars in ads. In fact, I looked at it, and I said, “Who is it? Are they — I’ve never seen anything quite like it.” Because I told them, “I’m going to have to do this.” You know, I was put here to do a job. And Pfizer and others were way ahead on vaccines. You wouldn’t have a vaccine, if it weren’t for me, for another four years because FDA would’ve never been able to do what they did — what I forced them to do.

And Pfizer and others even decided to not assess the results of their vaccine; in other words, not come out with a vaccine until just after the election. That’s because of what I did with favored nations and these other elements, instead of their original plan to assess the data in October. So they were going to come out in October, but they decided to delay it because of what I’m doing, which is fine with me, because frankly, this is just a very big thing. A very big thing. What I’m doing here — I don’t know if anybody is going to appreciate it. These people can’t even believe it. Alex, even you can’t believe it, can you? Look at you.

So they waited and waited and waited. And they thought they’d come out with it a few days after the election. And it would’ve probably had an impact. Who knows? Maybe it wouldn’t have. I’m sure they would’ve found the ballots someplace — the Democrats and the group.

These corrupt games will not deter us from doing what is right for the American people. And I will always put American patients first, and I think it could never be shown better than what I’m doing today.

Already, we’ve successfully lowered drug prices for the first time in 51 years. In September, we finalized a rule allowing states, wholesalers, and pharmacies to safely and legally import drugs from Canada. Career politicians have promised to institute this reform for decades, and we got it done.

The reason Canada — and this is going to be, I think, just a short-term fix, because until we have the favored nations fully ready, which we hope to have — be in January 1st. I think a very important thing is say January 1st — that’s right around the corner.

But I’m giving governors the right to go to Canada because they’ll pray — pay approximately 50 percent less for their drugs for — that they buy for their states. So the governors buying drugs for their states go to Canada. They buy the drugs for very, very much less, and they’ll be able to pass that on to the people of Florida. Ron DeSantis was the first one to ask, but others are asking also. And it’s a great thing. I mean, you’ll save 50 percent. They’re going to buy a lot from Canada initially, and I think, ultimately, they’ll be comparing prices. You’ll get the lowest price anywhere in the world, so you won’t need to buy from Canada.

In a few weeks, my administration will also finalize rules requiring federally funded health centers to pass drug company discounts on insulin and EpiPens directly to patients. And the EpiPen price has come way down. We remember those horrible stories about EpiPen. Well, the price has now come way, way, way down. We capped insulin costs for many seniors at just $35 a month, as I said, saving them an average of nearly $500 to $1,000 a year just on insulin. Saving $1,000 a year on insulin.

Since I took office, we’ve reduced Medicare Part D premiums by 12 percent, putting nearly $2 billion back in seniors’ pockets. Now, 12 percent is great by any standard, but 12 percent is peanuts compared to what we’ve done with favored nations. It’s — I think it’s probably the biggest story that we’ve ever had relative to drug prices. There’s never been anything like this. This is something that has been talked about for many years, but nobody had the courage to do it because of the power of big pharma.

We ended the gag clauses that prevented pharmacists from telling patients how to buy less expensive drugs. As you know, pharmacists could not talk to patients about how to buy drugs. How about that one? Think that’s right? And now they can and should.

We approved a record number of affordable generic drugs for three years in a row. And we put a very hemph- — a very heavy emphasis on generic drugs. And the pricing there has become very good, but that pricing will also go down very substantially.

No administration has ever fought harder or achieved more for our patients and for our seniors but for America, when you think of it. For America. Because other countries were paying a fraction of what we were paying; in some cases, a small fraction. I mean, it was — it was what — the numbers were just staggering, the difference between going to — I won’t name nations, but I could name five of them right off the top of my head that it is so incredible to think about, for years, what was happening. We’ve been working on this for two years. Statutorily, we had to go through a process.

But when you think that our nation, for the exact same pill out of the exact same box, often made in the exact same factory, same company — and you take a look at the — the cost was so much more. Many, many, times more.

In four short years, we’ve instituted the most dramatic series of drug pricing reforms in decades, and you’ll see that. It all comes to fruition right now, starting on January 1st. And the American people will benefit from our actions for many, many decades. And it should be very immediate. Now, I presume they’ll sue, but it’s a sue that they should never be able to win. They should never, ever be able to win.

So now I’d like to ask Secretary Azar to provide some more details as to the action. And then, Seema, I’d like to have you come up and say a word — few words. And great job. We appreciate it. Thank you.


We’re going to be talking to our great senior citizens. That’s what I’m here for today. (Applause.) We love our senior citizens.

And I’m honored to be here in Fort Myers to reaffirm my solemn pledge to America’s seniors. It’s so important to me. I happen to be a senior. (Laughter.) I will protect you, I will defend you, and I will fight for you with every ounce of energy and conviction that I have. (Applause.) You devoted your life to this country, and I am devoting my life to you. (Applause.)

My administration is working every day to give our amazing senior citizens the care, support, and respect that you deserve. And you understand that. We’ve worked together for a long time.

As President, I’m deeply aware that America’s 54 million seniors have borne the heaviest burden of the China virus. Many older Americans have endured months of isolation, missing weddings, births, graduations, church, and family reunions. You know that very well. You know it all too well.

My heart breaks for every grieving family that has lost a precious loved one. I feel their anguish and I mourn their loss. I feel their pain. I know that the terrible pain that they have gone through and you lose someone, and there’s nothing to describe what you have to bear. There’s nothing to describe it.

In times of challenge, we turn to our fellow Americans for a shoulder to lean on, and we turn to God for healing and strength. And together, we will overcome. We will overcome. (Applause.)

My message to American seniors today is one of optimism, confidence, and hope. Your sacrifice has not been in vain. The light at the end of the tunnel is near. We are rounding the turn. I say that all the time. Some of the media doesn’t like hearing it. (Applause.) But I say it all the time: We’re rounding that turn.

Don’t listen to the cynics and angry partisans and professional pessimists. We are Americans and we will prevail. We are prevailing and we are. It’s amazing what’s happening, if you look at what’s going on. It’s been really very amazing.

I’m moving heaven and earth to safeguard our seniors from the China virus, to deliver lifesaving therapies in record time, and to distribute a safe and effective vaccine before the end of the year. (Applause.) And we’re really doing it, even sooner than that. You see what’s going on. We have the vaccines getting ready to go.

Seniors will be the first in line for the vaccine. And we will soon be ending this pandemic. Hasn’t happened, a thing like this, since 1918, 1917. And that was a bad one, too. That was a real bad one.

I will not rest until we’ve eradicated this plague from our country and our lives and our world. We want it out. When the China virus arrived, we launched the largest mobilization since World War Two. Our aggressive and early action saved more than 2 million lives compared to the best estimates from last spring. You remember when they were giving you estimates.

Since the beginning, our nation’s seniors have been my top priority. It was obvious very early on that it was affecting the seniors — not young people. Young people are — they have that strong immune system. And I give all credit to them, but they have a strong immune system. And 99.99 — think of that.

But when you get into people that have a few more years, it’s a little bit — it’s a little bit more difficult. When you get a lot more years, it’s a lot more difficult. But what they’ve done with therapeutics now and what they’ve done with all of the other things that they’re doing, it’s incredible.

We heightened mitigation and surged testing to protect those at highest risk. We sent billions and billions of dollars in funding to personal protective equipment and distributed rapid testing to 15,400 nursing homes all over the country. And we’ve worked with a lot of governors. (Applause.) Yeah. We’ve worked with a lot of governors. And some have done a great job, and some have done a not a great job, and some have done a very poor job, actually. But some have done a great job. But we’re working very closely with the governors of states.

Just this week, even the New York Times — this was shocking — was forced to admit that, quote, “Experts are saying with genuine confidence that the pandemic in the United States will be over far sooner than they expected.” And — (applause) — and they’re right. But I was shocked to hear it coming out of the New York Times, right? I was a little sur- — and it’s thanks to my administration’s Operation Warp Speed. Incredible people. (Applause.)

Because of advances in treatment we pioneered — and we have many treatments, but because of these great advances, we’ve reached the point where the fatality rate is reduced by 85 percent since April. And now it’s up to probably 91 percent. (Applause.) Well, I’m here — I’ll tell you. (Laughter and applause.)


Well, I don’t know what they gave me, but give me some more of it right now, and you can have some. (Applause.) No, I know exactly what they gave me. It was actually pretty amazing.

I’m also working with the FDA and HHS to make the antibody treatment that I received. It’s called Regeneron, plus — also, it’s incredible. And, you know, what they what they can do today is incredible. And they felt very confident, even six months ago, when they started. Think of it: We got this all done in a very short period of time. And now we’re going for emergency use because we’re going to make it available to everyone who needs it for free — anybody in the country. (Applause.)

And Eli Lilly is making a very similar drug. And, Alex, they’re working very hard on that, right? Alex Azar. So thank you very much — because I want people to get it, and we’re getting it free. Right? So we got to do that. (Applause.) If you need it. If you don’t need it, that’s even better, okay? That’s even better. But if you need it — right? — you get it.

It’s really pretty amazing what happened, because I wasn’t feeling great. And the next day, I wake up and I’m saying, like, “Who can I fight today?” (Laughs.) (Applause.) Thank you.

So our groundbreaking therapies have significantly approved and improved our outcomes for elderly patients, but I’ll not relent until all American seniors are safe. You’re going to be safe — 100 percent safe. And we’re right — we’re at a point where, really, so much progress has been made.

Under Operation Warp Speed, we’re on track to deliver at least 100 million doses of a vaccine this year — and could even be a little bit sooner than what they were originally anticipating — with hundreds of millions more to quickly follow, Alex. Remember that, Alex.

Today I’m thrilled to announce that we have just finalized the partnership with CVS and Walgreens — two places you know pretty well, I guess — to immediately deliver the vaccine directly to nursing homes at no cost to our seniors. No cost. (Applause.) Right? No cost.

And once you have that vaccine — these are very effective. Once you have that vaccine, you can open those doors and say, “Here I am.” (Laughter.)

But with everything that I say and everything I do, if you feel safer at home — and, you know, we can all be like, “Let’s get out there.” And I felt, as President — I knew there was risk, but I had to be out. I can’t just be locked in a basement to put it — (applause) — lock him in a basement. I felt I had to be out there.

We’d see Gold Star families who would say — and they’ve been looking forward, for months, to coming to the White House and many, many other people — military people and heads of state. And I know you put yourself at risk, but you can’t — you have to lead your life.

But I say this: There are people also that would rather stay in place, stay where you are. And to those people — and I understand that very well: Stay. Just relax. Stay until it’s gone. And it’ll be gone, but stay. Don’t feel badly or don’t feel good about it. Just stay. If you feel safe, stay.

I’m working as hard as I can so you can kiss and hug your children and grandchildren very soon. (Applause.) That’s something I missed also, I will be honest with you.

As we shelter high-risk Americans with extreme vigilance, we must also allow lower-risk Americans to return to work and return to school. I mean, children should go to school. (Applause.)

My young son, Barron, had it. And he had it, and all of a sudden, he doesn’t have it. It’s like — you know, it was different; it’s a whole different deal. And they should go to school, and they have to. Because, you know, I talk about the cure, right? It cannot be worse than the problem itself. It’s a very simple statement. But the cure cannot be worse than the problem itself.

And with young children, they have to go to school. They have to be with other kids. They have to grow up. You can’t — they can’t lose a year of their life. (Applause.)

And if you look at some of, you know, these lockdowns that the Democrats are doing in some states — if you look at North Carolina and Pennsylvania and Michigan — we won the case against her in Michigan. I mean, she’s running like — (applause) — she’s running, like, a prison, except for her husband, who’s allowed to go boating. That doesn’t work out somehow. Fortunately, they caught him. He was going to go on the lake, boating. Oh, that’s nice. But nobody else was allowed to do it.

But we won the case against her for Michigan, and we freed up the state, and it’s a great thing. I mean, it’s a great thing. We freed up the state. (Applause.)

Because that whole thing, with the drugs and alcohol and depression, and all of the horrible things — we could go over a long list of things — but we can’t let that happen. So we want the Democrat — radical left, in many cases — Democrats — we want them to open their states. Open up your states. And we are very careful with our seniors, and that’s different. But open up your states. Get it back.

Despite punishing society-wide lockdowns in Europe — I don’t know if you’ve been watching — they’re now experiencing a massive surge in cases. Daily cases are 2,500 percent higher in the United Kingdom, as an example, and 722 percent higher in Europe than in the United States. Okay? Think of that. No, think of that. And we wish them — and we’re working with them closely. We’re making ventilators for them — for many of the countries over there.

We became the ventilator king. I mean, we didn’t have many ventilators. We had — we had — really, we inherited bare cupboards. I say, “The cupboards were bare.” And many of the states, they had — cupboards were bare. And now they’re loaded up, and they’re ready.

But we make — the hardest thing are the ventilators because of the complexity of the machine, and the cost and the size and — but the pure complexity. And we make thousands of ventilators now a month, and we’re sending them all over the world. We’re all set with the ventilators, but we’re sending them all over the world. (Applause.)

But hopefully you won’t need them. Soon, you won’t even need them. I really think you’re going to not need the ventilators, hopefully soon — very soon.

But sadly, in Europe, the average daily deaths are — are really soaring: 402 percent higher in the United Kingdom; 493 percent higher in Europe. Meanwhile, in the United States, deaths have decreased by 37 percent. So that’s something, right? (Applause.) So the fake news doesn’t want to tell you that. Right? They just — they don’t want — they want no piece of that. They don’t want anything to do with that.

So whether you’re Republican or Democrat, we must choose facts over fear — we have to; science over hysteria; hope over despair; and the common good over partisan politics. And again, stay — if you feel good, if you feel safe — because it’s going to be gone — stay where you are. Don’t leave. Don’t say, “Oh gee, I have to get out. The President said, ‘Let’s get out.’” Stay where you are. I have a lot of friends, they’re strong people. They’re senior citizens. Great people. Very successful people.

Hi. Look, she is waving. (Laughs.) Hi. (Applause.) Thank you. Thank you, hon.

But, you know, they’re — they’re tough actually. And –but, they — you know, they feel comfortable, until this is gone. And there are people — and I do that. Do that. I might do that. If I weren’t in this position, maybe I’d be doing it myself. In this position, it’s a little tougher.

But we cannot allow unscientific, panic-driven, fear-based policies to deny our children and grandchildren their future and their dreams. We can’t take a year or two years out of their life. (Applause.) There’s a whole social thing going on there, too.

These left-wing lockdowns will crush America. And my plan is very simple: We’re going to crush the virus and go back to exactly where we were. We’re almost getting back there now. (Applause.)

So, together, we will end this pandemic, we will rebuild our economy, and we will ensure our seniors can live long, happy, secure, and healthy lives with your grandchildren and your children. You’re going to hug them, right? It’s good. (Applause.)

Under my leadership, next year will be one of the greatest years in the history of our country economically. We’re grateful to be joined today by Secretary of Health and Human Services, Alex Azar. Alex, we’re counting on you. (Applause.) We’re counting on you. I’m going to blame him if this stuff doesn’t happen fast. Right?

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services — a fantastic woman — Administrator Seema Verma. Thank you, Seema. Great job you’re doing. (Applause.)

And a friend of mine who’s become very, very popular. I guess that was what that big applause was. I was backstage, and I said, “Who just came in?” I thought Elvis entered the room. (Laughter.) It was your Florida Governor, Ron DeSantis. (Applause.) Stand up, Ron. That’s great, Ron. Great.

And, by the way, we have some crowd. You see what’s going on outside? The mayor said he’s never seen anything — he’s never seen anything like that. (Applause.) He’s never seen anything. No, that’s a lot — there’s a lot of love outside, I want to tell you. It’s — that’s a lot of love.

And, you know, we’re leading in the State of Florida, just so we understand. (Applause.) By perhaps a lot.

Also with us, some warriors: Representatives Gus Bilirakis. Gus. Gus. (Applause.) Great job, Gus. And another friend of mine — these are really terrific people — Greg Steube. Greg. Thank you very much, Greg. Thank you. (Applause.)

Thanks as well to Fort Myers Mayor Randy Henderson. Randy. (Applause.) Thank you. Thank you, Randy. Good job, Randy. That’s quite a crowd, huh?

And Cape Coral Mayor Joe Coviello. Joe Coviello. Thank you Joe. (Applause.) Great job. Great job.

We’re also tremendously honored to be joined by World War Two and Korean War veteran, a very brave guy, Wally Cortese. Wally Cortese. (Applause.) Thank you, Wally. You look good, Wally. I’ll tell you, two wars and you’re looking — you’re looking good. Thank you, Wally. Appreciate it. Beautiful. Thank you very much.

Thanks also to all of the members of the VFW Golden Gate Honor Guard. They’re with us today. Thank you. That’s so great, huh? (Applause.) That’s so great. VFW. Fantastic job. Thank you very much for being here.

As I fight to protect our amazing seniors from the China virus, I’m also fighting to protect you from another danger, one which threatens everything we cherish, value, and worked our entire lives to build and to defend. As we gather today, seniors are under threat from a radical-left movement that seeks to destroy the American way of life. We’re not going to allow it. (Applause.)

And you know one thing: Sleepy Joe can do nothing about it. (Laughter.)

The left has been taken over by socialists and Marxists and extremists, and they have. They want to transform our nation into a country that would no longer be recognizable. And their agenda will shatter America’s seniors. Their plan to delay the vaccine, delay therapies, and prolong the pandemic will cost thousands and thousands of lives — will be horrifying for our country.

Their plan for higher taxes — they want to quadruple taxes; every company will move out. They’ll go back to where they came. We had tremendous people, tremendous companies come into our country. We’re bringing tremendous jobs — 160 million jobs. We’ve never had anything like it before the plague, and then we’re building it back up again. (Applause.)

The last four months, we’ve set records on employment, on hiring, employment. And, you know, a number that, let’s say a year ago, wouldn’t have sounded great but now sounds incredible: 7.8 percent unemployment. Think of it. People were talking about 42 percent. We’re back down to 7.8, and we’ll be soon down to the number where we were seven months ago. Pretty amazing. (Applause.)

I never thought I’d be happy with 7.8 percent, but, you know, when you think about it — right? — it’s — they were talking 39 percent, 42 percent. Ron, 7.8 is a pretty — an amazing thing. We did that in a rapid fashion. Nobody has ever seen anything like it, actually.

Their plan for higher taxes and crippling regulations, however, would crater our economy. They’re insane energy polices — because you know they’re going to be fracking.

Hey, Biden, for a year and a half, was saying, “There will be no fracking.” Then he lucks out; he gets the nomination because Elizabeth Warren refused to get out. So Bernie — a second time. That happened twice to Bernie. Bernie — he’s a hell of a loser, that’s one thing I’ll say. (Laughter.) He knows how to lose. (Applause.) Well, he knows how to lose. And loses — he goes back to work like nothing happened. (Laughter.) No, they took it away from him twice. I think the second time, in a way, worse — because she stayed in, and she took the votes. And Sleepy Joe just got in there. (Laughter.) That’s why you got to be careful. You got to be careful. You never know what happens.

But if you take a look — and we can’t let any of this stuff happen. And you look at what’s happened to other countries where they’ve had this philosophy, where they’ve had this ideology. We can’t let. But you watch what they’re saying about the fracking, where he said, “No, there…” And he said it with such — you know, it’s not like, “Well, I’ll think about it.” He’s doing the same thing with the courts right now. They’re going to pack the Supreme Court. You see what they want to do.

That would be destruction of our country. But you take a look. So he says, “No, there will be no fracking.” These are the words. “There will be no fracking. You don’t understand what I just said. There will be no fracking.” And he gets very agitated. (Laughter.) “There would be no fracking.” (Laughter.)

And he gets the nomination, goes to Pennsylvania. They inform him that they have a million jobs, and fracking is a big deal. And they like inexpensive energy. Right? And so he goes from “There will be no fracking,” with great anger, to “I never said there wouldn’t be fracking.” (Laughter.)

It’s the craziest thing. If that ever happened to me — (laughter) — and the media doesn’t even talk about it. That’s just one of many things. Then he does the thing with the courts. You — you see that, right? He goes, “I’ll tell you left — I’ll tell you after the election what I’m going to do.” How important is it? Because he’s going to put on radical-left, crazy judges that will destroy your lives.

You know, it’s the most important. They’ve — they’ve always said — I’ve always heard — Ron, I’ve always heard this: that the most important thing a President does is pick Supreme Court justices, right? (Applause.) I would say maybe the military, you know? But — but let’s say it’s right there. And they have to — he has to create a list of more than just that. He has to create a list and let you know. And he has to pick from that list. That’s what I did. I created a list of 25 people — highly, highly capable people. And a lot of people said that’s why I won the election, actually. So I don’t know if that’s true or not, but it was — it was a very important part, Mayor. You understand, mayors. You know that.

So their insane energy policies will abolish millions of jobs and cost seniors thousands of dollars per year in higher energy bills. Their anti-police agenda will empower violent mobs and put every community at risk.

Their anti-suburban agenda threatens the property values of millions of American seniors, and your families, who own homes in residential neighborhoods in the suburbs. I’m saving the suburbs. You know, people were saying, “Well, women in the suburbs, do they like Trump?” I said, “Yeah, they like me. You know why they like me? Because I’m saving their homes.” (Applause.) That’s why they like me. They may not like me, but they like what I’m doing, and that’s more important.

Oh, boy, they have these crazy people. The — the people on television, “I don’t know if suburban women…” Suburban women want security, they want safety, they want law and order. They want their homes to be protected. (Applause.) The socialist ideology — ideology that they will use and indoctrinate our youth with is — it’s like poisonous anti-American propaganda.

The plan by Washington Democrats to give amnesty and free healthcare to illegal border-crossers will obliterate Medicare, bankrupt your Social Security, robbing you of the benefits that you’ve paid for your entire lives.

You know, look, take a look at Venezuela. You know, people don’t realize that was a wealthy country 18, 17 years ago. It was so wealthy. And it’s gone from being wealthy — they don’t have medicine. They don’t have food. They don’t have water. They don’t have anything. And it’s — you know, it can happen here, just a much larger version with that ideology. And that’s the ideology that they’re looking at. It’s crazy.

These radicals will destroy Medicare with totally open borders. And, by the way, you know the wall? It’s up to almost 400 miles. (Applause.) Four hundred. Four hundred miles. And it goes down deep, (inaudible). It goes down deep and up very high. No, it’s had a tremendous — we’ve never had a stronger southern border than we have right now. (Applause.) It’ll be finished very soon. We’re doing 10 miles a week. That’s a lot. Ten miles a week. Army Corps of Engineers are also doing Lake Okeechobee and lots of other things. Right? They’re doing a good job, right? (Applause.)

They’re giving away your benefits — that’s what they want to do — to anyone in the world who trespasses into our country. And, you know, we all have big hearts, and we want to take care of people. But when you say, “We’re going to give you free healthcare. We’re going to give you college education…” I sarcastically said once, “We’re going to give you a beautiful, brand-new Rolls Royce” — (laughter) — okay? — “if you’re an illegal immigrant.” And CNN went, and they said, “The President lied to the seniors.” (Laughter.) You know, they just don’t get it. They get it. Actually, unfortunately, they get it more than you would think. They’re a little bit on the evil side.

But, you know, they — you’re going to bring millions of people. You’re going to bring millions and millions of people. It’s like when you say “free healthcare” and “free education,” and “free this and that,” millions of people are going to pour into the country. It’s not going to be stoppable. And we can’t let that happen. They care more about illegal aliens than they care about senior citizens — the Democrats.

The left is coming after me because I’m defending you, and that’s true. That’s why they come after me every day. (Applause.) But we caught them on the Russian hoax. We finally caught them after two and a half years — the Russian hoax. (Applause.) Turned out to be the exact opposite: They’re the ones that were playing with Russia. That was a beauty. Hillary — Crooked Hillary.

 Yeah. I agree with you. I used to just be quiet. I agree with you 100 percent. They paid — they paid — millions and millions of dollars they paid. And they tried to show it. It was the greatest hoax and the greatest political crime in the history of our country. That’s what they committed.

But I’m the only one standing between their open borders and extremism and the healthcare benefits that you’ve earned and paid for — all your life you paid for. As long as I’m President, no one will lay a hand on your Medicare or your Social Security. (Applause.)

As a candidate, I made a sacred promise that I’d strengthen, protect, and defend your Medicare benefits, and that’s exactly what I’ve done. I’ve done that, right? (Applause.)

My administration has fought to deliver greater security, affordability, fairness, economic stability to our nation’s seniors. Under eight years of the previous administration, premiums for Medicare health plans went up, including a 25 percent increase right here in Florida. That’s for the previous people.

Under my administration, we’ve lowered Medicare Advantage premiums by a number nobody even believes — 34 percent nationwide. (Applause.) And today it’s the lowest level in 14 years. Did you know that, Ron? That’s not a bad thing for you to put into your speech, right? Who would think that? No, but seriously, we’ve brought it way down. They’ve done a great — this group over here, they’ve done a great job.

Thanks to our efforts — (applause) — there are 2,000 — thank you. There are 2,000 more Medicare Advantage plans today than there were three years ago, Seema. Huh? That’s incredible. Think of it. That means more choice and more competition for better care at a much lower cost.

When we rapidly expanded telehealth for Medicare beneficiaries during the pandemic, the number of telehealth users increased from 14,000 a week to 1.7 million a week. What’s that percentage? (Applause.)

Yet, all of this danger — it’s all in danger because if these other people get in, they will end all of that. The telehealth, it’s — you know, it’s interesting. We’ve learned something. For children, they’re much better in a classroom than they are on a laptop. Okay? Children. (Applause.) But for your health, and what you can do, you can do so much of it. It’s such a big percentage. Better than going out and going through — this telehealth has been amazing. It’s been really incredible. It’s been an incredible thing.

So it’s — it’s increased like 6-, 7,000 — I think 6,500 percent. And it’s probably the only thing that came out of this whole deal that we really can take pleasure at: telehealth. So it’s been really an incredible thing that’s happened.

Over 130 Democrats in Congress, including far-left Senator Kamala Harris, who is the most left —
(Laughs.) I said, “He’ll never choose her because nobody treated him worse than her.” Nobody. Plus, she was — her poll numbers were sinking. She never even got to Iowa. She never got there. And when I said, “Oh…” — and, by the way, did Mike Pence do a good job the other day? (Applause.) Right? He’s a good man. Did a great job.

And I had a great — thank you. I had a really — (laughs) — I had a lot of fun last night with that. That was a nice — (laughter) — that was a nice evening. It was a nice, pleasurable evening, as I have somebody going totally crazy last night. (Laughter.)

But I told you — I told you that. She told me she’s going to — oh, okay I believe you, right? (Laughter.)

No, but I understand that worked out very well last night. That’s what the word is. So that’s good. (Applause.) Another evening in paradise, I call it. (Laughter.)

They’re sponsoring a socialist healthcare plan that would annihilate your Medicare. The Democrats’ policy proposals may go by different names — they put all sorts of names. They say “single payer” or so-called the “public option,” but really, they’re all based on the same core promise: raiding Medicare to fund a socialist healthcare takeover. And it’s going to destroy your Medicare. That’s the one thing you know for sure.

Every one of their plans involves rationing care, restricting access, denying coverage, slashing quality, extending wait times, and massively raising your taxes. Other than that, it’s actually quite good. (Laughter.)

As we know from seeing these left-wing policies in action around the world, seniors will be the victims. And that’s what happens. The first to go are the seniors. The victims are really the seniors. It’s — you know, this is nothing that unique.

Socialist healthcare plans always end up denying care and coverage to the sick and the elderly in order to control costs. And they always feel that this is the easiest way to do it. We must not let them bring this lethal and deadly agenda to America. Don’t let it happen. (Applause.) You got to vote them out. Get out and vote.

Democrat healthcare proposals would abolish private insurance for 180 million Americans. Just so you know, there are many people — they’ve had a good life, they’ve done well, they have private plans. They are unbelievable. They love their plan. Those plans are gone. Those plans are gone.

They’d abolish the Medicare Advantage program that benefits 24 million seniors, including one out of two Hispanic seniors and one out of three African American seniors who enrolled in the Medicare Advantage, right? And that would all be ended, it would be abolished for big, fat, ugly socialized medicine. You go to a hospital — if you don’t feel good, go to a hospital room and wait for three days to see a doctor.

I will never allow that to happen. Under my administration, your Medicare Advantage is safe, your benefits are protected, and I will always protect patients with preexisting conditions. Always. Always. (Applause.) Always.

They always play that card, right? You know, remember, they used to say, “Oh, he’s going to give up…” — first they said I was going to be in a war within the first week. Whatever happened to that, right? (Laughter.) Just the opposite. Our great warriors are coming home. They’re all coming home. They’re all coming home. (Applause.)

Look at North Korea; they thought it would be a war — in a war immediately with North Korea. How’s that worked out, right? It’s worked out very nicely. You know, talk; we’ll talk, keep talking. But it worked out very well.

But the other thing they’d say, “He will destroy your Social Security.” Really? Did I? I said, “No.” No, they’re going to destroy, because they’ll destroy our country. They’ll destroy your Social Security and they’ll destroy your country. And Joe won’t have any idea what happened because he’s gone. Let’s face it. (Laughter.) He’s gone.

Another critical issue for senior citizens is the price of prescription drugs. This is something I’m very proud of, because we’ve lowered Part D prescription drug premiums by 12 percent, saving senior citizens $1.9 billion. (Applause.) But the big is yet to come.

I stood up to big pharma, and that’s not easy. They got big money. They’re the biggest lobbyists in this country, by far. And I signed an executive order implementing a “most favored nations” policy for the United States. (Applause.) You know, for years, you’ve heard we pay more for drugs than any other country. Well, that’s not even close. We pay much more.

And then other countries, that we know very well, take advantage of us, and they pay a fraction. I mean, a frac- — you wouldn’t even believe how much less. But a fraction. Ten cents for a pill as opposed to two dollars for a pill. Same pill from the same lab, plant. Right? And I instituted a favored nations clause. I said, “If Germany or some other country is getting our stuff low, I want a favored nations.” Meaning, I want it for the same price. And they have gone crazy. (Applause.)

I have never seen so many ads. They put on more ads against me now than Sleepy Joe Biden. (Laughter.) I’m telling you.

And they understand, and it’s — you know, look, it should have been done a long time ago. This should have been done years ago. Plus, I got rid of the middlemen. And I gave Ron DeSantis the right to go to Canada in the meantime, because I think eventually you’ll be using this. But in the meantime — (applause) — you’ll also be getting the rebates. Okay? Rebates — you know who they go to? The middlemen. You know how rich the middlemen are? I’m rich. These guys blow everyone away. I don’t know — nobody even knows who the hell they are. Did you ever hear — does anybody know a middleman?


Yeah, it’s Biden’s son. It’s Hunter. (Laughter.) Oh, it’s Hunter. (Applause.) Oh — I’ll bet you Hunter is a middleman; he’s collecting — he’s like a vacuum cleaner. He follows his father around collecting. (Applause.) What a lot of disgrace. It’s a crime family. (Applause.) You want to know something? It’s a crime family. He’s following his father. Hunter Biden is a middleman. Oh, that’s wild. No, these people are amazing. These middlemen — you’re right.

Hunter made no money until his father became Vice President, and now he’s like a vacuum cleaner. (Laughter.) His father goes to Germany; Hunter is right there. “Hey, give me a couple of million.” Not couple of million; a hell of a lot more than a couple of million. It’s a shame. I’ll tell you what: It’s an organized crime family, as far as I’m concerned. (Applause.)

I capped out-of-pocket costs. And the way they get protected by big tech and by the media — the media doesn’t want to ask — you know, they didn’t ask — this is the hottest subject there is right now. And I didn’t watch Sleepy Joe last night. I just wanted to see what he looked like. He wasn’t looking too good. (Laughter.) I just couldn’t watch. It was too painful. (Laughter.) But — but, you know, they didn’t — I understand that they did not ask him a question about this. Can you believe it?

No, think of it. And Stephanopoulos interviewed me two weeks ago, and it was a — you know, he was nasty. (Laughter.) He was nasty. I mean, he was tough. He was — he’s a tough guy. I watched last night — the little stuff I watched — and what I heard, it was like softballs everywhere. It was so — but he didn’t — this is the hottest subject there is. They didn’t ask him one question about their corruption in the family. They didn’t ask him one question about how big tech is protecting him.

Big tech is not allowing anybody — how about this? They took down, I guess, Kayleigh, but they took — how about Kayleigh? Is she great? No, but they took down — (applause) — they took down her Twitter site because she had the audacity to put up an article written in the New York Post, which is one of the biggest newspapers in the country. I think it’s the oldest newspaper in the country. And they put up a article, and they took down her site. Can you believe what’s going on in this country?

And then they talk about — they talk about “freedom of the press.” They also said last night — it was very interesting; they talked about the transition, the friendly transition. “Will you agree to the friendly trans-…” And, of course, the answer is “yes.” First of all, I don’t think there’s going to be a transition, because we’re going to win. (Applause.) But, you know. Let’s hope we don’t have to worry about it.

No, but think of this. They get up, “We demand a friendly transition.” And yet we caught them spying on my campaign and trying to take down the President of the United States. Right? That wasn’t too friendly. Right? That wasn’t too friendly. And they — and we caught them cold.

Anyway, let’s get back to the medical parts of the world. This is much simpler to understand if you think about it.

But I capped out-of-pocket costs for insulin at $35 a month. People were going — literally, they were going bankrupt over insulin, or they weren’t getting the insulin, which is a terrible thing. So it’s $35 a month or less for seniors in many Medicare drug plans, saving them an average of nearly $450. I mean, that’s a tremendous saving. Right? (Applause.)

In many cases, much less than 35. Seema, in many cases, much less than the 35, right? Did you say one dollar, in some cases? What’s your lowest number? Come on, Seema, let’s hear it.
 Huh? I — she doesn’t want to get too much. I think maybe one dollar is too much. Okay. She’s very straight. She’s a straight player. And you brought it down from what number? The 35, down from what, Seema?
 Tremendously, yeah. It’s a great job, but you — you did that. But she would come up to me for a year and a half talking about the insulin. The insulin is the biggest — it’s such a problem for people, where they just — they’d go without it. They had no choice because it was too expensive.

So, great job, both of you. Thank you very much. (Applause.)

I also announced that more than 35 million Medicare beneficiaries will soon receive a card in the mail with $200 that you can use to help pay for prescription drugs. (Applause.)

But I was going to tell you, I’ve allowed Ron DeSantis now to go to Canada and buy your prescription drugs. Now, why am I doing that? (Applause.) Because before all of the favored nations and everything kick in — which, ultimately, I think that’s what you’re going to be using more than anything — but Canada gets the drugs for about 50 percent of what we get them for. Same drug, same exact pill, company, everything — Johnson & Johnson, whatever the company.

Ron is going to buy from Canada, and he’s just cut your price in half. (Applause.) Right? Right? When are you starting that, Ron? When do you think you’ll start?

Very soon. So, Alex, get him approved up, okay? Whatever you have to do. I think it’s great. You know, some people say, “Well that doesn’t…” My attitude is: Whatever the hell it takes. We have this terrible system that’s taken years and years to rig, like the ballots. Right? Like the ballots. It’s taken them years and years to rig. So they’re very simple: Go buy from Canada. We get rid of the middleman. We get rid of all of this nonsense. You like that, Mayor? You like that, Mayor? (Applause.) Both of you? It’s pretty great, Ron. Do it fast, Ron. Do it fast.

To care for — I mean, you’re not going to believe what’s going to be happening with your numbers. I mean, they’re coming — they’re coming down big. We’re not talking about 1 percent. I mean, I don’t even want to mention it, but last year, out of 51 years, this is the first time that prescription drug prices have come down in 51 years. They didn’t even come down much. They came down, like, 1 percent, which I don’t want to mention in one way, but in another way, it tells you something. First time in 51 years where drug prices come down. But now you’re talking about a 50, 60, 70, and 80 percent redro- — reduction in your prescription drug prices. (Applause.) So we got to get it all finished now.

Wouldn’t it be terrible if Sleepy Joe took this over — the system that I’ve created? And you people will say, “Man, has he been a great President. Look at what he’s done.” Like, as an example, transparency starts on January 1st. I said to my people, “You couldn’t start it, like, in August — back?” They said, “Sir, you have to go statutorily here, here, here.” I say, “Yeah, but I better win this damn election.” Because can you imagine, Mayor? He’ll be saying, “Boy, I’m getting a lot of credit. What the hell did Trump do? This is unbelievable.” And I promise you they won’t give the credit to us, will they? Huh? No. But I think we’re not going to have to worry about it. I hope that. So get out and vote, vote, vote. (Applause.)

To care for our nation’s veterans, I signed into law VA Choice and VA Accountability. Nobody thought that would be possible. (Applause.) Huh? Nobody thought that would be possible. And we’ve also invested billions and billions of dollars in research and innovative treatments for Alzheimer’s disease, kidney disease, sickle cell disease, AIDS, cancer, and many other illnesses.

And I will say this: Age will be eradicated in this country now in six years. I started right at the beginning. President Obama should have started — he could have started it two years before, two and a half years before. They wasted two years. But we started it right at the beginning of the administration, and it was a 10-year program. We’re down to six years. In six years, it will be essentially eradicated in our country. Think of that. Who would have thought that? (Applause.) It’s an amazing — it’s an amazing thing. Should have been started before I got into office. It could have been.

Day after day, I’m fighting to defend our seniors from the virus, from big pharma — oh, they love me — (laughs) — special interests, and from the radical, socialist left. American seniors remind us that we’ve inherited an incredible, extraordinary legacy.

You’re the generation that defeated fascism and triumphed over communism, sent American astronauts to the Moon. You built our country into the greatest and most powerful nation the world has ever known. And, frankly, right now, it’s more powerful than it ever was. When I took over, we had a depleted military. (Applause.)

We have — now our military — we have the greatest weapons on Earth. We are the envy of the world. We have the greatest weapons — the missiles, rockets, tanks, the tankers, the freight- — freighters, the boats, the ships, the jet fighters — F-35s, the F-18s, F-16s. Nobody has the equipment that we have in the world; not even close — (applause) — even the hypersonic missiles.

You know, under the Obama administration, they sol- — they stole our plans for hypersonic. That’s the super-duper. I call them the “super-duper missiles,” the ones that go so fast, you can’t even see them. And now we have that. You probably read about it last night. We have the fastest, by far, in the world.

No, we’re doing a great job. And our seniors and generations of Americans before you, they did not pour out their heart and soul and blood and tears for this country only now to surrender our freedom, our flag, and our American way of life. (Applause.)

You, as seniors, have protected us. And now, I, as a senior, and all of my people, we are protecting you. Your courage, your leadership, your patriotism, and your faith are an inspiration to us all.

And with your help, we will transcend every obstacle, defeat every threat, and triumph over every single challenge. We will lift our nation to new heights of greatness and glory, and America will emerge stronger, more united, more independent, and more prosperous than ever before.

For our nation, for our great seniors, and for our beloved children and grandchildren, the best is yet to come. Thank you. God bless you, and God bless America. Thank you very much. (Applause.)


Well, thank you very much. And keep that enthusiasm going. Get out and vote. We got to vote. We got to vote these people into oblivion. (Applause.) Vote them into oblivion. Got to get rid of them. So bad for our country.

First of all, I’m feeling great. I don’t know about you. How’s everyone feeling? Good? (Applause.)

And I’m honored to welcome — we call this a “peaceful protest” — to the White House in support of the incredible men and women of law enforcement and all of the people that work so well with us. And I have to tell you, our black community, our Hispanic community, thank you very much. Thank you. (Applause.)

But before going any further, I want to thank all of you for your prayers. I know you’ve been praying, and I was — (applause) — in that hospital. I was watching down over so many people. And I went out to say hello to those people, and I took a little heat for it, but I’d do it again, let me tell you. I’d do it again. (Applause.)

And on behalf of myself and the First Lady, it just has been really an incredible outpouring. And we’re starting very, very big with our rallies and with our everything, because we cannot allow our country to become a socialist nation. (Applause.) We cannot let that happen. And that’s what would happen — or worse. By the way, or worse.

I want you to know our nation is going to defeat this terrible China virus, as we call it. (Applause.) And we’re producing powerful therapies and drugs, and we’re healing the sick, and we’re going to recover. And the vaccine is coming out very, very quickly, in record time, as you know. It’s coming out very, very soon. We have great, great companies doing it, and they’ll be distributing it, and we will — through our military — very, very rapidly.

Through the power of the American — the American spirit, I think more than anything else, science, medicine will eradicate the China virus once and for all. We’ll get rid of it. All over the world, you see big flare-ups in Europe, big flare-ups in Canada — a very big flare-up in Canada; you saw that today. A lot of flare-ups. But it’s going to disappear; it is disappearing. And vaccines are going to help, and the therapeutics are going to help a lot.

I just want to thank everyone this afternoon. What beautiful colors. Where did you get that color, Candace? (Applause.) Where did that come from? That’s — what a beautiful color. I want to get one of them. I want to put one of them on instead of a white shirt. I want to thank you, though, seriously.

Every day, more black and Latino Americans are leaving behind left-wing politicians and their failed ideology. (Applause.) That’s what they are. They failed for many years and many, many decades.

Democrats have run nearly every inner city in America — and I mean for a hundred years — and their policies have delivered nothing but calamity, poverty, and trouble. Sleepy Joe Biden has betrayed black and Latino Americans. If you think he can run this country, you’re wrong.

AUDIENCE: Booo —

THE PRESIDENT: For half a century — shipping your jobs to China. That’s what they’ve been doing. We’re bringing the jobs back. We’ve been bringing them back. (Applause.) We’ve been charging China a lot of money too, with the tariffs. A lot of money. Billions and billions of dollars.

Opening your borders to mass illegal immigration. The wall is now 380 miles long; it’ll soon be finished. (Applause.) Trapping us in endless foreign wars — these ridiculous foreign wars that last for 19 years. Our people are coming back home. You know that.

And selling you out to the rich, globalist Wall Street donors. They have the Wall Street donors. They want the Wall Street donors. Someday, somebody is going to have to write a little story about that.

Black and Latino Americans are rejecting the radical socialist left, and they’re embracing our pro-jobs, pro-worker, pro-police — we want law and order; we have to have law and order — and pro-American agenda.

I want to thank the BLEXIT Foundation for organizing this event. (Applause.) Thank you very much. Thank you. And especially your two founders, two friends of mine, great people: Candace Owens and former Tucson police officer Brandon Tatum. Thank you both. (Applause.) Great job. What a great job. Two really brilliant, smart, young people. Great. And thank you very much for being here. We really appreciate it.

So you just marched to the White House because you understand, to protect the lives of black Americans and all Americans, you have to have your police support you. You have to have that. (Applause.)

If the left gains power, they’ll launch a nationwide crusade against law enforcement. And they’ve already done that. And you see them; they’re doing that at a level that nobody has ever seen before.

The other day, in the debate, Biden couldn’t even use the words “law enforcement.” I said, “Say ‘law enforcement.’ Say ‘law enforcement.’” And he was bailed out by the anchor. Then I said — then I said, very simply — I said, “Name one law enforcement group that’s supporting you.” He couldn’t do it. But he was bailed out by the anchor. Second time bailed. He got bailed out by that anchor a lot.

Taking their funds away, their firearms, their fundamental authorities — taking everything away, including your freedom. Joe Biden even said, when you call 911, a therapist should answer the call. That doesn’t work. That doesn’t work. But this is the people telling him what, because he doesn’t say. He’s told what to say.

You saw what they introduced today. They’ve gone through a period of years: “No fracking, no fracking, no fracking.” All of a sudden, he gets the nomination and he says there’s going to be fracking. For Pennsylvania, Oklahoma, Texas, North Dakota, all of you, there will be — if it happens, all of those jobs are gone; your energy jobs are gone, if they get in. Just remember I said it. Okay? Just remember.

Biden —
I don’t think so either. (Applause.)
There’s been — and I have to say, there’s been more enthusiasm — we have had more enthusiasm right now, right now, this year, than we had four years ago by a factor of three times. (Applause.) And we had a lot. And they had none. They have no enthusiasm.
 They have no enthusiasm. In fact, the gap is so incredible, and a poll just came out. I think it said 56 percent of the people prefer their position now in the midst of a pandemic than they did four years ago. Think of what that means — 56. And it’s a Gallup poll, and it’s the highest poll ever recorded — 56 percent. Now, tell me about that.

No, we had it going, and we really had it going, and then the plague came in from China, but we’re getting rid of that, and we’re rebuilding it, and it’s going to be better than it was even before. (Applause.)

But the homes and churches and businesses of black and Hispanic Americans have been looted; you know that. They’ve been vandalized and burned by left-wing fanatics. Total bad people. They know what they’re doing. Yet Biden likes to call them “peaceful protesters.” You see people —

You see anchors from a couple of the very bad, very corrupt networks standing, and behind them, the cities are burning and they’re saying these are peaceful protests. And you look, and everything is on fire.

And I want to thank our law enforcement, and I want to thank everybody in the community and the community drives who are working with law enforcement. I want to thank them. (Applause.) I think we probably have the support of every law enforcement group in this country, practically. I don’t know of any that I don’t. Maybe there must be some; there must be one. They’ll find one tonight. They’ll say, “No, he misrepresented.”

But we have a level of support the likes of which nobody has I don’t think ever seen before. I don’t think so. And you’re going to see that. And you see how many crooked ballots are being found and turned back in and fraudulent? Just what I said. Then they’ll say, “He doesn’t believe in freedom.” I totally believe in freedom. That’s called “freedom.” What we’re doing is freedom. (Applause.)

Tremendous problems with the ballots. Fifty thousand in Ohio. Twenty-five thousand — you have to see it. I mean, every day, there’s a story about ballots. Some thrown out; they happen to have the name “Trump.” Military ballots were thrown out with the name “Trump” on them. Okay?

 But I think we’re to swamp them by so much. Hopefully it’s not going to matter. And we have law enforcement watching. We have law enforcement watching all those ballots. They’re being found for a reason.

Left-wing politicians like Kamala Harris, who really did not do very well the other night —
 By the way, did our Vice President do a good job, Candace? Did he? (Applause.) That was — that was easy for him.

No, he did a great job, because we’re on the side of right. We really are. We’re on the side of right. And, by the way, we are, and it’s true. And I say it, and I say it all the time now, more and more: We are draining the swamp like nobody in history has ever drained the swamp. (Applause.) Nobody in history has ever drained.

We’re here today to deliver a united message to police officers all across our great land that American — and I mean every American, every race and color, we love you. Every race, color, creed, we support you, we honor you. It’s a dangerous profession. They’ve been doing an incredible job, and I just want to thank them on behalf of everybody here today, because that’s why we’re safe. (Applause.)

In contrast, the Democrats’ socialist program and platform — and it really is more than socialist. It’s not just socialist; it’s beyond socialism.
 He says “communist.” That’s — yeah, that’s about right.

But I recently announced my plan to deliver more opportunity, security, fairness, and prosperity to the black community, to the Hispanic community. (Applause.) And you know what it is — I don’t have to go over it — but it’s the Platinum Plan, and it’s going to bring back new jobs, like at a level that you’ve never seen before. And we’ve done a lot. We’ve done a lot.

But increase capital. It’s going to increase money coming into the black community, to the Hispanic community, where it’s been very much shut out. In advance, very much homeownership and wealth building. And it’s already taken place, and it’s taken place at a level. And had we not been hit by the pandemic, you would have seen numbers like you’ve never seen before. But those numbers are already rebuilding again. (Applause.)

We’re going to build up a peaceful and safer neighborhood program, like — like you haven’t seen, with the highest standards of policing. We’ll create a healthcare system that delivers better care at a lower cost. Obamacare is a disaster. We want to terminate it, we want to get great healthcare, and that’s what we’re doing: great healthcare. And we’ll always take care of preexisting conditions, always. (Applause.)

And I think we’re at a point where we’re getting. And right now, if you look at what we’ve done in healthcare — people don’t talk about it; we’ve done an incredible job. Less expensive healthcare at a much, much — much better healthcare at a much less expensive price. You can’t do better than that. And it’s happening, and it’s happening fast.

Another thing is school choice. (Applause.) You have to have school choice. Charter schools, school choice.

So I make this statement every once in a while, and people think it’s a little bit on the bold side, but we’ve achieved a historic reduction in violent crime. We signed a landmark criminal justice reform bill that nobody thought was possible to even think about. (Applause.) I did that. I did that. I got that done. And I worked with a lot of people, but we got it done. The Obama administration couldn’t get it done. Biden couldn’t even think about it. He doesn’t even know what it is. (Laughter.)

We have a — we have prison reform. We achieved the lowest black and Hispanic unemployment rate in the history of our country. (Applause.) The black youth unemployment rate reached the lowest ever, again, in the history of our country.

And last year, black and Hispanic American poverty reached the lowest ever in the history of our country. It’s all building back up so quickly. (Applause.)

And if you look at what we’ve done with criminal justice reform, if you look at what we’ve done with historically black colleges and universities, where we funded them; they couldn’t get funded. Nobody was funding them. For years and years and decades, nobody was funding them.

And if you look at what we’ve done with Senator Tim Scott of South Carolina, Opportunity Zones and the jobs created — and I’ve said it very strongly, and perhaps — I don’t know, criminal justice reform, people say maybe that’s the best of all, but the fact is they’re all great. Every one of them is great. And I say the fact is that I’ve done more for the black community than any president since Abraham Lincoln. I say it. Nobody can dispute it. (Applause.) Nobody can dispute it. It’s true. Nobody can dispute it.

So we are now beginning the fastest economic recovery in history. We created a record 11.4 million jobs just in the last four months. That’s the fastest ever. The U.S. has seen the smallest economic contraction of any major nation anywhere in the world. So we’ve seen the smallest going down. If you look at it, that’s an incredible statement.

Our opponents will crush the comeback with unscientific lockdowns. They want to lock everything down. Here we go again. They want to lock it down. No.

We’re not going to let it happen. We’re not going to let it happen. So important you get out and vote. You got to get out and vote.

So we got a great poll in Florida, got a great poll in North Carolina, got a great poll in Arizona. (Applause.) Got a great poll in Nevada. Actually got it. Just got a great poll in Nevada. I think we’re doing really well. I mean, this is in addition to states that we’re going to win. Georgia is looking fantastic. Texas is looking fantastic. (Applause.)

Well, think about Texas: They have no oil. They don’t want oil, they don’t want guns, they don’t want religion. I don’t think you’re going to win Texas very well. (Applause.)

No, we got a great poll in Texas. We’re getting great polls all over the place, and they understand it. It’s driving them crazy. And you know why though? And, Candace, it is — it’s because of the spirit. There’s a spirit the likes of which this country hasn’t seen in a very, very long time.

So I just want to thank you all for being on the White House lawn, this beautiful great lawn. (Applause.) And I’m very proud of this country. I’m very, very proud.

I want to thank all of the doctors and labs and scientists and all of the people that are working so hard, because we’re way ahead of everybody. But I just want to thank most particularly you, because you people come out and you come out, and you cheer and you love your country, and you get it. You’re way, way ahead of many, many people in this country.

But the country is getting it. The country is seeing something now.

The people of our country — and the whole world is watching — are seeing things now that they haven’t seen in this country for decades. They’re seeing a spirit and a resilience like they haven’t seen.

I just want to thank you. And get out and vote. We got to make this bigger than even four years ago. It’s more important. This is the most important election we’ve ever had. This is more important than even four years ago. I used to say “the most important,” and it was true at the time. This is the single-most important election in the history of our country.

Get out and vote. And I love you. Thank you. Thank you very much. (Applause.) Thank you. Thank you, Candace.



 Does anybody know these two gentlemen in the room? If you don’t, let us know. You shouldn’t be here if you don’t. It’s great to have you guys.

Yesterday, I was very proud to nominate Judge Amy Coney
Barrett to the United States Supreme Court. She is one of our nation’s most brilliant legal minds, and I think she’ll do very well. We’re moving along very quickly. Tremendous unity in the Republican Party. It’s the consequence of winning elections, which we did very substantially, both in the Senate and obviously in the White House. And I think we’re going to take back the House; I believe that very strongly. Kevin is doing a fantastic job. And I really believe we’re going to take back the House, and we’re all working very hard on that.

We have noticed some comments made in the media about my incredibly qualified nominee, Amy. The New York Times said her religion is not consistent with American values. She’s Catholic. That covers a lot of people. That’s a very disgraceful thing to say.

Some of the comedians — I don’t think they’re comedians because comedians are supposed to be funny; they’re not funny, like, at all. They’re nasty. They’re mean. And they think they’re funny. And someday — hopefully, it’s in five years — but someday, when I’m not here, they’re going to be off television because their ratings, which aren’t very good anyway, but their ratings are going to go down like you’ve never seen before. That includes a lot of others also.

In fact, I’m sort of waiting for the New York Times and the Washington Post, ABC, CBS, NBC, CNN, MSDNC — I’m waiting for them to endorse me, because if they don’t, they’re going to drop with a thud like — you know, it was supposed to have happened long ago, and then we won a race, and it was a great — it was a great victory.

And our — I think we’ve never had a more energized base. I don’t think so. Nobody has ever seen anything like it. The rallies that we’re having are incredible; we call them “protests.” They’re friendly protests. We don’t want to call them “rallies,” but the friendly protest rallies are — have been incredible. People — I don’t think anybody has ever seen anything like it. And this is still long before an election. This isn’t like the evening before. These are long before an election.

The — the incredible crowd we had in Pennsylvania and Virginia — in every state, no matter where — in North Carolina, Florida — no matter where we go, we’re having crowds like nobody — I don’t think anybody has ever gotten before ever. Not even close.

There’s a level of enthusiasm — in Iowa today, with the tractors — thousands of tractors. In different states, the boats. You know, thousands and thousands of boats. Boaters for Trump, Tractors for Trump, Farmers for Trump — it’s really been very nice to see the level of enthusiasm.

I thought, though — on the religious situation with Amy, I thought we settled this 60 years ago with the election of John F. Kennedy. But seriously, they’re going after her Catholicism. I will stand with her, fight with her, and we will make sure that these attacks stop because they really — it’s unprecedented. They’re basically fighting a major religion in our country. This is incredible. Fighting any religion and fighting Catholicism is just incredible that they can be doing it. Are you Catholic, Rudy?

Twenty-nine Supreme Court vacancies have occurred during an election year or before an inauguration. In every single instance, going back to George Washington, the President has performed his constitutional duty and nominated a justice. And in almost every one of these cases over the past 230 years where the President and the Senate were the same party, the justice — as you know, that justice was confirmed.

This is about two centuries — more than two centuries of precedent. And I think it’ll continue. I think we’re going to have — I think it’s going to go quickly, actually. And I think —

And again, I don’t know if I’ve ever seen the Republican Party more unified. I think it was probably even more unified with the impeachment hoax, actually. When they did the impeachment hoax, I think that was — which really turned out to be a hoax, because now you look at what’s happening with the FBI and Justice Department; if you look at all of those text messages, emails that were sent, it — we have been totally proven right. They spied on our campaign, and everybody knew it. Biden knew it; Obama knew it. Everybody knew it. And the lamestream media just, you know, doesn’t want to pick it up, although some have. I will say, Catherine Herridge at CBS has done a fantastic job on it. We appreciate that.

But this is a major scandal. This is a scandal, the likes of which nobody has ever seen. This is actually the biggest political scandal in the history of our country. And with the exception of a few, I mean, they just don’t want to write about it. You should read about that, Kelly, you know. You should write about it. You should write about it. You should do something on CNN about it, because it’s the biggest single scandal of our time; certainly the biggest political scandal, perhaps, in history.

They — they spied on our campaign, and then they tried for a coup. That didn’t work out too well. And it turned out that, if you read the — you read the texts that came out over the last three days, it turned out that they were really — it was reversed; it was the DNC and the Democrats that were using Russia. And related or unrelated, Hunter Biden got three and a half million dollars from the wife of the mayor of Moscow. Why did he get three and a half million dollars? And then he got millions more than we thought from Ukraine, and he got millions more than we heard about from China. Hunter Biden — “Where’s Hunter?”

So these are all questions that are very, very big on the Internet. The biggest thing going on the Internet is exactly this. And we’re going to have to see how that all turns out, but it turned out that we were right. So we went through two and a half years of ruining people’s lives, like General Flynn and many others — ruining their lives. And it turned out to be just the opposite. It was the Democrats that were dealing with Russia and other things.

So hopefully, our Attorney General and others working on this very, very hard, very diligently, will — it’ll lead to something that will be very important for our nation. I think it’s very important for our nation. It’s one of the most important things.

A central issue of the 2018 midterm elections was the Kavanaugh confirmation. And American voters punished the Democrats in the Senate. You so what happened; we picked up two seats. Again, something that hasn’t been reported on very much. But we picked up two seats for their treatment of Justice Kavanaugh and expanded our Senate majority to confirm Supreme Court justices, which was great.

And now Democrats are really brazenly attacking Judge Barrett for, again, her faith, mostly, is what I’m hearing — for her Catholic faith. And whether it’s C or anybody else, I think they ought to treat religion with much more respect. I think it’s a disgrace that they can do it.

Biden and the Democrats are desperate to distract from the real issues, which is that their party has been taken over by socialists, extremists, and probably communists. I think it’s beyond socialism; I think it’s a step beyond, and could be many steps beyond, if you take a look.

And if they win, they will nominate justices who will destroy the American way of life, the American Dream. They will destroy the American Dream. They’ll destroy America. They’ll destroy the United States of America. Your private right to own a firearm will be totally eliminated, your guns will be confiscated, your ability to live by your religious faith will be devastated. They’ll abolish America’s borders and give government healthcare to illegal aliens, which will destroy our healthcare system because so many people will pour into our country. That’s a tremendous incentive.

On voter fraud, as you know, hopefully there won’t be a very big movement because hopefully we’re going to be able to win. I think we have the massive movement. I think we’re going to have a tremendous, tremendous victory. There won’t be a transition because I can’t imagine we call a transition if we win. You know, they talk about, “Will there be a friendly transition?” Of course, there will, but we have a big problem, and you see it every day; you see it happening every day with ballots.

We are gravely concerned about the Democrat assault on election integrity. In Brooklyn, 25 percent of mail-in ballots were ruled invalid in June’s Democrat primary. You saw that. In a special election in New Jersey, 20 percent of the ballots were thrown out, and four people are now being prosecuted for fraud. This is all in the mail-ballots.

Thirty-five thousand mail-in ballots were rejected in Florida’s primary, and one hundred thousand were rejected in California, and that’s just the beginning.

A week after Pennsylvania’s primary, half of the counties were still counting ballots, and you’ll be counting them here because this is a much bigger version of all of that. Just last week, a number of discarded military ballots were discovered in Pennsylvania. All of the recovered ballots — these were ballots that were thrown out — had been cast for a person named Donald J. Trump.

In Wisconsin, three trays of mail containing absentee ballots were found in a ditch; they were thrown in a ditch. Three trays. That’s a lot.

In North Carolina, voters are reporting receiving two ballots in the mail. Many — many voters. I hear it’s thousands, but they’re getting two ballots. I wonder if those are Democrat areas, because the word is they are.

In Iowa caucus’s last winter, you know what happened there. You all reported on it, I think, very well. Right? Do you remember that one? It was not good, right? But in Iowa, they still don’t really know who the winner was. I think they called somebody eventually, but it was many, many weeks later. But they really have no idea, and that’s being — continues to be — and that’s little; that’s just a small — it continues to be litigated in Iowa. They can’t run a simple caucus, yet now they’re trying to radically write election laws nationwide, just weeks before the presidential election.

I heard in New York today that Governor Cuomo wants to try and simplify the ballots because he thinks they’re too complicated. And all of that, I agree with him. I think that’s good. But you don’t do that now. The ballots are starting to come in. And, you know, you can’t do it now. It’s too late.

Joe Biden and the Democrat extremists oppose all of these efforts to ensure election integrity. They oppose voter ID. Think of it: Voter ID. They want a picture. They have a picture for almost everything nowadays, but they don’t want a picture. You had a picture to get into the Democrat National Convention. You had a card with your picture on it. Did you know that, fellas? You have a — to get into the Democratic National Convention, you have a card and your picture is on it, but they don’t want it for voting, which is our very sacred right.

They want — we want proof of citizenship, a Social Security number requirement. They don’t want any of this to happen. And they want no signature verification. They don’t want to have a verified signature.

So they want none of the safety valves that you would have. Think of it: They opposed voter ID. They approve proof of — they oppose proof of citizenship. They oppose a Social Security number and requirements for Social Security numbers as a safety valve. And they oppose even simple signature verifications. They don’t want to have signature verification.

They want to require all states to do mail-in balloting, right? I call it “unsolicited.” Some people call it “universal.” I think “universal” doesn’t make sense because nobody understands why universal. So it’s “unsolicited.” They want unsolicited mail-in ballots. In other words, you send these ballots to whoever you can think of.

We had a case, I guess in New Jersey, you were reading to me, where somebody was sent two ballots, and they had slightly — one was — had a hyphen in it, the name, and the other one had a “K.” And they got two names. So I wonder if that person was a Democrat. Probably was.

And mailing of millions of ballots to people who never asked for them. So millions of people are going to be getting ballots who never asked for the ballots. They don’t want the ballots, or maybe they want them; maybe they don’t. Nobody knows, really. This is really a recipe for chaos. And when you look at what happened in Iowa — and again, that was run by very smart people. It was a very limited election. It was very small numbers we’re talking about. We’re talking about doing that for the entire nation.

And you can forget about November 3rd, because you’re going to be counting these things forever. And it’s very dangerous for our country.

So, certainly, a transition — we all believe in transition. We believe not only in transition, but a very friendly. But when the ballots and when the system is rigged, which it is; obviously it is. And the only one that knows that better than me are the Democrats. And they go into closed rooms and they must laugh like hell at what’s going on, because these ballots are being found. And this is the beginning. I talk about it now at the rallies. All these people are watching. Eyes and ears. Thousands and thousands. Tens of thousands.

But there’s no justification for these extreme changes to the election law. And if you can go to the grocery store, you can have an ID with your picture on it to vote. It’s so important. I mean, it’s just so important.

So a lot of things are going on. Very importantly, though — I think very, very importantly is when you — when you do your reporting, I think you ought to report on the FBI scandal because it’s one of the great scandals in the history of our country. And I think people want to hear about it. If you look at the Internet, you’ll see how people want to hear about it. And they will know about it, and it just makes the media look so bad. And there’s so much reporting — I could go into it right now, but I’m not going to do that.

But it would be a tremendous thing for the mainstream medium — media to really start reporting. I think your ratings we go through the roof; I really do — because people really are tired of this fake stuff where you don’t even talk about it. And the biggest scandal — certainly the biggest political scandal in the history of our country, by far; bigger than Watergate. Much bigger than Watergate. And they try and avoid it as much as possible. It’s getting very hard to avoid.

So we’ll take a couple of questions, and you may have a question for these two very wonderful people, brilliant people, from the standpoint of politics, I would say, and law. And if you have anything for Kayleigh, we’d love to do that.

Thank you very much.  Thank you.  Thank you.  I stand before you today to fulfill one of my highest and most important duties under the United States Constitution: the nomination of a Supreme Court Justice.  (Applause.)  This is my third such nomination after Justice Gorsuch and Justice Kavanaugh.  And it is a very proud moment indeed.

Over the past week, our nation has mourned the loss of a true American legend.  Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg was a legal giant and a pioneer for women.  Her extraordinary life and legacy will inspire Americans for generations to come.

Now we gather in the Rose Garden to continue our never-ending task of ensuring equal justice and preserving the impartial rule of law.

Today, it is my honor to nominate one of our nation’s most brilliant and gifted legal minds to the Supreme Court.  She is a woman of unparalleled achievement, towering intellect, sterling credentials, and unyielding loyalty to the Constitution: Judge Amy Coney Barrett.  (Applause.)

We’re also joined by Amy’s husband, Jesse — thank you, Jesse, very much — and their seven beautiful children.  Congratulations to you all.  A very special day.

With us as well are the First Lady — thank you, First Lady — (applause) — along with Vice President Mike Pence and his amazing wife, Karen.  Thank you very much, Mike.  (Applause.)

Judge Barrett is a graduate of Rhodes College and the University of Notre Dame Law School.  At Notre Dame, she earned a full academic scholarship, served as the Executive Editor of the Law Review, graduated first in her class, and received the law school’s award for the best record of scholarship and achievement.

Upon graduation, she became a clerk for Judge Laurence Silberman on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.  Amy then received one of the highest honors a young lawyer could have, serving as a clerk on the Supreme Court for Justice Antonin Scalia.  A highly — (applause) — a very highly respected law professor at Notre Dame wrote to Justice Scalia with a one-sentence recommendation: “Amy Coney is the best student I ever had.”  That’s pretty good.  (Laughter.)  Justice Scalia hired her shortly thereafter.

And we are honored to have his wonderful wife, Maureen — where is Maureen?  Maureen Scalia — with us today.  (Applause.)  Thank you.  And our great Secretary of Labor, thank you very much.  Thank you, Mr. Secretary.  (Applause.)  Very good genes in that family, I will say.  Very good genes.

Before joining the bench, Judge Barrett spent 15 years as a Professor at the University of Notre Dame Law School.  She was renowned for her scholarship, celebrated by her colleagues, and beloved by her students.  Three times, she was selected at Notre Dame, Distinguished Professor of the Year.

When I nominated Judge Barrett to serve on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in 2017, every law clerk from her time at the Supreme Court endorsed her and endorsed her nomination, writing, quote, “We are Democrats, Republicans, and independents…yet we write to support the nomination of Professor Barrett to be a Circuit Judge…Professor Barrett is a woman of remarkable intellect and character.  She is eminently qualified for the job.”

And I can tell you, I did that too.  I looked and I studied, and you are very eminently qualified for this job.  You are going to be fantastic.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Really fantastic.

The entire Notre Dame Law facility and faculty, everybody — everybody at that school also — we got so many letters — also wrote letters of support of Amy’s nomination to the Seventh Circuit.  They wrote, in effect: “Despite our differences, we unanimously agree that our constitutional system depends upon an independent judiciary staffed by talented people devoted to the fair and impartial administration of the rule of law.  And we unanimously agree that Amy is such a person.”

For the last three years, Judge Barrett has served with immense distinction on the federal bench.  Amy is more than a stellar scholar and judge; she is also a profoundly devoted mother.  Her family is a core part of who Amy is.  She opened her home and her heart, and adopted two beautiful children from Haiti.  Her incredible bond with her youngest child, a son with Down Syndrome, is a true inspiration.

If confirmed, Justice Barrett will make history as the first mother of school-aged children ever to serve on the U.S. Supreme Court.  That’s good.  (Applause.)

To her children Emma, Vivian, Tess, John Peter, Liam, Juliet, and Benjamin, thank you for sharing your incredible mom with our country.  Thank you very much.  (Applause.)

Amy Coney Barrett will decide cases based on the text of the Constitution as written.  As Amy has said, “Being a judge takes courage.  You are not there to decide cases as you may prefer.  You are there to do your duty and to follow the law wherever it may take you.”  That is exactly what Judge Barrett will do on the U.S. Supreme Court.

I want to thank the members of the Senate.  We have so many of them here today.  Thank you very much.  I see you in the audience, and you’re so proud.  But I want to thank you for your commitment and to providing a fair and timely hearing.  I know it will be that.

Judge Barrett was confirmed to the Circuit Court three years ago by a bipartisan vote.  Her qualifications are unsurpassed — unsurpassed — and her record is beyond reproach.  This should be a straightforward and prompt confirmation.  It should be very easy.  Good luck.  (Laughter.)  It’s going to be very quick.  I’m sure it’ll be extremely non-controversial.  We said that the last time, didn’t we?  Well, thank you all very much, and thank you for being here.  That’s really great.  Thank you.  (Applause.)

I further urge all members of the other side of the aisle to provide Judge Barrett with the respectful and dignified hearing that she deserves and, frankly, that our country deserves.  I urge lawmakers and members of the media to refrain from personal or partisan attacks.

And the stakes for our country are incredibly high.  Rulings that the Supreme Court will issue in the coming years will decide the survival of our Second Amendment, our religious liberty, our public safety, and so much more.

To maintain security, liberty, and prosperity, we must preserve our priceless heritage of a nation of laws, and there is no one better to do that than Amy Coney Barrett.

Law and order is the foundation of the American system of justice.  No matter the issue, no matter the case before her, I am supremely confident that Judge Barrett will issue rulings based solely upon a fair reading of the law.  She will defend the sacred principle of equal justice for citizens of every race, color, religion, and creed.

Congratulations again to Judge Barrett.  I know that you will make our country very, very proud.
Please, Amy, say a few words.  Thank you very much.  Congratulations.  Congratulations.  (Applause.)

JUDGE BARRETT:  Thank you very much, Mr. President.  I am deeply honored by the confidence that you have placed in me.  And I am so grateful to you and the First Lady, to the Vice President and the Second Lady, and to so many others here for your kindness on this rather overwhelming occasion.

I fully understand that this is a momentous decision for a President.  And if the Senate does me the honor of confirming me, I pledge to discharge the responsibilities of this job to the very best of my ability.  I love the United States, and I love the United States Constitution.  I am truly — (applause) — I am truly humbled by the prospect of serving on the Supreme Court.

Should I be confirmed, I will be mindful of who came before me.  The flag of the United States is still flying at half-staff in memory of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg to mark the end of a great American life.  Justice Ginsburg began her career at a time when women were not welcome in the legal profession.  But she not only broke glass ceilings, she smashed them.  For that, she has won the admiration of women across the country and, indeed, all over the world.  (Applause.)

She was a woman of enormous talent and consequence, and her life of public service serves as an example to us all.  Particularly poignant to me was her long and deep friendship with Justice Antonin Scalia, my own mentor.

Justices Scalia and Ginsburg disagreed fiercely in print without rancor in person.  Their ability to maintain a warm and rich friendship, despite their differences, even inspired an opera.  These two great Americans demonstrated that arguments, even about matters of great consequence, need not destroy affection.  In both my personal and professional relationships, I strive to meet that standard.

I was lucky enough to clerk for Justice Scalia, and given his incalculable influence on my life, I am very moved to have members of the Scalia family here today, including his dear wife, Maureen.

I clerked for Justice Scalia more than 20 years ago, but the lessons I learned still resonate.  His judicial philosophy is mine too: A judge must apply the law as written.  Judges are not policymakers, and they must be resolute in setting aside any policy views they might hold.  The President has asked me to become the ninth justice, and as it happens, I’m used to being in a group of nine: my family.  (Laughter.)

Our family includes me, my husband Jesse, Emma, Vivian, Tess, John Peter, Liam, Juliet, and Benjamin.  Vivian and John Peter, as the President said, were born in Haiti and they came to us, five years apart, when they were very young.  And the most revealing fact about Benjamin, our youngest, is that his brothers and sisters unreservedly identify him as their favorite sibling.

Our children obviously make our life very full.  While I am a judge, I’m better known back home as a room parent, carpool driver, and birthday party planner.  When schools went remote last spring, I tried on another hat.  Jesse and I became co-principals of the Barrett e-learning academy.  (Laughter.)  And, yes, the list of enrolled students was a very long one.

Our children are my greatest joy, even though they deprive me of any reasonable amount of sleep.  I couldn’t manage this very full life without the unwavering support of my husband, Jesse.  At the start of our marriage, I imagined that we would run our household as partners.  As it has turned out, Jesse does far more than his share of the work.  To my chagrin, I learned at dinner recently that my children consider him to be the better cook.  (Laughter.)

For 21 years, Jesse has asked me, every single morning, what he can do for me that day.  And though I almost always say “nothing,” he still finds ways to take things off my plate.  And that’s not because he has a lot of free time — he has a busy law practice — it’s because he is a superb and generous husband, and I am very fortunate.

Jesse and I — (applause) — Jesse and I have a life full of relationships, not only with our children, but with siblings, friends, and fearless babysitters, one of whom is with us today.  I am particularly grateful to my parents, Mike and Linda Coney.  I spent the bulk of — I have spent the bulk of my adulthood as a Midwesterner, but I grew up in their New Orleans home.  And as my brother and sisters can also attest, Mom and Dad’s generosity extends not only to us, but to more people than any of us could count.  They are an inspiration.

It is important at a moment like this to acknowledge family and friends.  But this evening, I also want to acknowledge you, my fellow Americans.  The President has nominated me to serve on the United States Supreme Court, and that institution belongs to all of us.

If confirmed, I would not assume that role for the sake of those in my own circle, and certainly not for my own sake.  I would assume this role to serve you.  I would discharge the judicial oath, which requires me to administer justice without respect to persons, do equal right to the poor and rich, and faithfully and impartially discharge my duties under the United States Constitution.

I have no illusions that the road ahead of me will be easy, either for the short term or the long haul.  I never imagined that I would find myself in this position.  But now that I am, I assure you that I will meet the challenge with both humility and courage.

Members of the United States Senate, I look forward to working with you during the confirmation process, and I will do my very best to demonstrate that I am worthy of your support.  Thank you. 


Well, thank you very much.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Thank you very much.  So many doctors.  So many fantastic doctors, nurses.  That’s great.  Please, sit down.

I’m thrilled to be here in North Carolina with so many of these unbelievable professionals, doctors, nurses, and amazing healthcare workers.  It’s really an honor of mine.

As the world witnessed during our battle against the China virus, America has the greatest medical professionals anywhere on Earth.

Today, I will lay out my vision for a healthcare system that puts patients first, families first, and — perhaps most importantly for all of us — America first.  (Applause.)  Thank you.  Thank you.

Under the America First Healthcare Plan, we will ensure the highest standard of care anywhere in the world, cutting-edge treatments, state-of-the-art medicine, groundbreaking cures, and true health security for you and your loved ones.  And we will do it rapidly, and it’s in very good order, and some of it has already been implemented.

In short, we are delivering better care with more choice, at much lower cost, and working to ensure Americans have access to the care they need.

My plan expands affordable insurance options, reduces the cost of prescription drugs, will end surprise medical billing, increases fairness through price transparency, streamlines bureaucracy, accelerates innovation, strongly protects Medicare, and always protects patients with preexisting conditions.  (Applause.)  Thank you.

By contrast, the Democrat Party is pushing a socialist nightmare.  Their plans will result in rationing care, denying choice, putting Americans on waitlists, driving the best doctors out of medicine permanently, and delaying lifesaving cures.

Over 130 Democrats in Congress, including Senator Harris, have endorsed legislation to outlaw the private health plans of 180 million Americans.

On top of it all, former Vice President Joe Biden promised to give free federal healthcare to anyone in the world who illegally crosses our border.  His plan to provide government healthcare to illegal immigrants would bankrupt our healthcare system, collapse our hospitals, and destroy Medicare, while bringing millions and millions of people — lured — into our country.  As long as I am President, we will safeguard our borders and our seniors.

We are pleased to be joined today by Secretary of Health and Human Services — done a great job — Alex Azar.  Alex.  Hi, Alex.  (Applause.)  Thank you.  And very importantly, CMS Administrator Seema Verma.  Thank you, Seema.  (Applause.)

A great friend of mine and a great friend of healthcare, frankly, Senator Bill Cassidy.  Bill.  Hi, Bill.  (Applause.)

Representatives Michael Burgess and Greg Murphy — so instrumental.  Thank you.  Thank you, fellas.  (Applause.)

And many, many state and local officials are here with us.  Thank you very much.

Since the plague arrived from China, we have seen our doctors, nurses, first responders, scientists, and researchers at their very best.  We slashed red tape to accelerate the development of lifesaving treatments, reducing the fatality rate by 85 percent since April.  Incredible.

Overall, Europe has seen an almost 50 percent greater excess mortality rate than that of the United States.  And despite Europe’s punishing lockdowns, they are now seeing a huge surge, very sadly, in cases.

Under Operation Warp Speed, my administration is developing a vaccine in record time.  It will be distributed before the end of the year, and maybe quite a bit sooner than that.  Four vaccines are now in the final stage of clinical trials.  They’re just about at the end.  A lot of things are looking very good.  It is the most ambitious vaccine program in U.S. history, probably in any history.  The vaccines are being mass-produced in advance so they can be delivered within 24 hours of approval.   The vaccine will be safe and it will be effective.  It will defeat the virus and it will end the pandemic.

The economy will surge to record highs.  You see what’s happening with the numbers that are coming out — records all.  Normal life will fully resume.  That will be great.  And next year will be one of the greatest years in the history of our country from an economic and, hopefully, in many other ways.

When I was elected, I inherited a thing called “Obamacare.”  Has anybody heard of Obamacare?

AUDIENCE:  Booo —

THE PRESIDENT:  It was terrible.  That’s the way I feel, too.  (Laughter.)  It was terrible and very, very expensive.  Hurt a lot of people.  Premiums were too high.  Deductibles were a disaster.  Patients had no choice.  You couldn’t keep your doctor.  But, by far, the worst part of Obamacare was this thing called the “individual mandate.”

As part of our largest-ever tax cut in the history of the United States, we put in a provision to kill this worst provision of Obamacare: the individual mandate.  It was a disaster, and it was really the essence of Obamacare.  It made you pay a tremendous amount of money in order to not have to pay for health insurance.  Think of that: You had to pay a fortune in order not to have health insurance.  It was really terrible and so unfair to so many.  Destroyed families.

We were able to terminate the individual mandate, but kept the provision protecting patients with preexisting conditions.  That would not have been — that particular law would never have been signed if it were otherwise.  Obamacare is no longer Obamacare.  As we worked on it and managed it very well.  We stabilized it and got premiums down very substantially.  That was Alex and that was Seema.  You did a fantastic job.

But it’s still unacceptable to me because it’s too expensive and doesn’t really do the job as well as we could have.  So what we have now is a much better plan.  It is no longer Obamacare because we’ve gotten rid of the worst part of it — the individual mandate — and made it much less expensive.  A lot of that was through good management.  We manage it properly.  We have tremendous people working on it.  Simultaneously with all of this, we are joining in a lawsuit to end this ill-conceived plan.  I’m in court to terminate this really, really terrible situation.

If we win, we will have a better and less expensive plan that will always protect individuals with preexisting conditions.  If we lose, what we have now is better than the original — the original version of Obamacare, by far.  Much better.  Much better.  Again, we will always protect patients with preexisting conditions.

So today I’m laying out my vision for the future of American healthcare with the America First Healthcare Plan.  As we restore America to full strength, the first healthcare plan will be a core part of our national renewal.

In a few moments, I’ll sign an executive order outlining the three pillars of my plan and directing my administration to implement these critical reforms.

The first pillar of my plan is more choice — more choice for the American patients.  (Applause.)  Very important.  The last administration severely restricted consumer choice through the greatest healthcare lie ever told: “If you like your plan, you can keep your plan.  If you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor.”  You remember that?  Twenty-eight times that was stated by our President, but it turned out not to be true.

When I took office, more than 50 percent of counties nationwide offered plans from only a single insurance company on the individual market.  Starting next month, more than 90 percent of the counties will have multiple options to choose from, which is really some difference.  (Applause.)

Under our plan, you’ll have the freedom to shop for the option that is right for you and your family.  These options include new, affordable choices that cost up to 60 percent less than Obamacare.  Think of that: 60 percent less.

For example, we’re opening up short-term plans that are much cheaper than Obamacare and that can be customized to your individual needs.  We’re also offering association health plans that allow small businesses to pool together and offer more affordable policies to the employees.  These are tremendous options that didn’t exist before we came into office.

And through a massive expansion of health reimbursement arrangements, millions of Americans will be able to shop for a plan of their choice on the individual market and then have their employer cover the full cost.  Furthermore, I’ll work to make individual healthcare premiums fully tax deductible.  That will be a big difference, all right?  (Applause.)  Through these and other reforms, we’re putting American patients back in charge and we’re putting them first.

My plan will also revolutionize access to telehealth.  That’s something that really has taken off during the pandemic.  It’s taken off like a rocket ship.  (Applause.)  It’s increased close to 9,000 percent.  Nobody was using it.  And when we had the pandemic, they started using it.  Then they started really liking it.  Then it started getting better and better.  Bill, now it’s up to 9,000 percent.  Who would think that, right?  One of the few things that we got from this disaster that came from China.

When we rapidly expanded its availability for Medicare beneficiaries during the pandemic, the number of telehealth users increased so incredibly to 14,000 a week.  It was 1.7 million.  It was increasing at levels that nobody has ever seen before in just about any kind of a program.  This is the future of healthcare.  We will ensure all Americans have the freedom to consult with doctors from the safety and convenience of their homes.

The second pillar of my plan is lower costs for families and seniors — lower costs.  (Applause.)  For years, patients have been shocked to receive unexpected bills for thousands of dollars in medical services they never agreed to.  The first America First Healthcare Plan bans this deeply unfair practice.  We will end surprise medical billing.  The days of ripping off American patients are over.

My plan also includes the vital reform of price transparency.  (Applause.)  And tra- — transparency is great for the great doctors, the good doctors, and it’s also great for the great and good hospitals.  That’s where it’s really fantastic: for them, too — in addition, obviously, to the patients.

For the first time ever, we will create true competition in healthcare.  Both hospitals and insurance companies will be required to post all of their prices online.  This transformative policy will allow you to see your exact out-of-pocket costs before you go for treatment, making it easy to shop for the best price.  Costs will come way down.  Some people think this will have a bigger impact than healthcare itself.  It’s a tremendous thing.  No matter where it’s been put, it’s been an incredible service, and it’s — it’s worked miracles.  It’s been brilliant for patients.

Next, I’m taking on the lobbyists and the special interests to lower the price of prescription drugs.  For years, American patients have subsidized socialist nations.  (Applause.)  And you know that.  We talk about it all the time.  Congress, they come over — we’ve been talking about it for a long time.  They’ve been talking about it for years.  They know the problem.  But we’ve been subsidizing socialist nations and others by paying the highest drug prices in the world by far, and yet we’re the largest purchaser of prescription drugs by far.  And this is all while countries got away with paying so much less — so much less, incredibly less.

Under my plan, we will pay the exact same price as other countries.  That’s at the lowest level.  So we will be matching the lowest price with what’s now many times the highest price, and we won’t pay a penny more.  What will happen is the lower prices will come up a little bit, but you’ll get discounts of 40, 50, 60, 80, 90 — who knows? — percent — numbers that you wouldn’t even believe.

And we were the only ones in 52 years to bring drug prices down.  Last year, they went down, as you know.  (Applause.)  But that was before this.  They went down just a little bit, but just a little bit was the only time in 52 years.  Now they’re going to go down massively — favored nations.  This will lead to a very large savings for American families and plummeting drug prices.  They will plummet.

The Obama-Biden administration caved to Big Pharma and allowed drug prices to explode.  The only bad part about this transaction is that they are advertising like crazy.  “Make sure you don’t elect Trump.”  And all it means is that your drug prices are coming down.  So, it’s a — it’s incredible.  They have unlimited money for ads, but they’re taking ads.  And every time you see an ad, just think that your drug prices are coming down.

I now understand why other politicians wouldn’t do it, because it was a very easy thing to do.  But it took a certain amount of courage, I will say that.  (Applause.)

So it means that I’m taking on Big Pharma like never before.  Nobody has done this before.  They understood favored nations.  Favored nations is you get the best prices, the lowest — no matter where it is anywhere in the world.

So if Germany is paying 10 cents for a pill, and we’re paying two and a half dollars for the same exact pill — from the same place, same plant, same genius scientist, same everything, same laboratory — we get the same price as they do.  You’re talking about numbers that are unthinkable. Favored nations clause.  So it’s really something.

And they’re attacking me viciously.  We know that.  And they’re attacking me, really, because I’m fighting for you.  But it’s worth the fight.  It’s worth the fight.  I think people are going understand.  (Applause.)

And I can say this, I think — I don’t think it’s confidential.  Our chief of staff is here, Mark Meadows, from a very great state, known as North Carolina.  (Applause.)  Happens to come from North Carolina.  That’s good stuff.  He wanted to be here for that reason, probably more than even listening to this, because you’ve heard it.  But Mark will tell you that Big Pharma is calling and negotiating and negotiating, and they want to make a deal.

And there’s a deal somewhere, but it’s — it’s something that’s taking place right now.  So they’re negotiating.  But this is where we are, and they’re negotiating for one reason; before that, they wouldn’t even think about negotiating with any other administration.  They would — they cannot believe this is actually happening.

And if we can make a deal, we will.  But, Mark, you’re negotiating, literally, as we speak, right?  So if he doesn’t make a great deal, we’ll blame North Carolina, okay?  (Laughter.)  So that’s great.  No, Mark is a real pro at this.  Understands it — complicated business, but he understands it very well.

Today, my administration is taking action on every piece of the executive order I signed on prescription drug importation in July.  The American people pay an average of over — listen to this — three times more for medicine than Canadians.  So you could be two feet away on each side of the border — three times more.  And that’s the way it is.  Canada is far more than many other countries.

My plan will allow states, wholesalers, and pharmacies to do something career politicians have promised for decades — because it was very simple as an idea — but never delivered.  We will finally allow the safe and legal importation of prescription drugs from Canada.

So this means — (applause) — so this means a state or whatever — it can go to Canada and buy your drugs for a fraction of the price that they’re charging right now.  Massive numbers of — tremendous numbers.  Florida wants to do it, Colorado wants to do it — many states want to do it, and they will be doing it.  But that’s still higher than the favored nations.  So as favored nations kicks in, I think that probably beats everybody no matter where you are, no matter where you’re trying to buy.

This will be a game changer for American seniors.  And by allowing you to do this through Canada, we’re doing it very, very quickly.  So it goes very fast.  And the new rule goes into effect as of today.  Is that fast enough?  I think so.  What do you think?  (Applause.)  Our congressmen.

The America First Healthcare Plan includes another historic provision to benefit our great seniors.  Under my plan, 33 million Medicare beneficiaries will soon receive a card in the mail containing $200 that they can use to help pay for prescription drugs.  Nobody has seen this before.  These cards are incredible.  The cards will be mailed out in coming weeks.

I will always take care of our wonderful senior citizens.  Joe Biden won’t be doing this.  (Applause.)  And this is also partially because of the tremendous money that we’re going to be saving with the favored nations and various other things that we’ve done.

We’ve approved more affordable generic drugs than any administration in history.  I had no idea, but I have had many doctors who I have great respect for, by the way, come to me.  And I said, “Well what’s the difference between this and this?”  One is a very well-known name; one is just a pill in a bottle with no tag on it.  And they said, “Zero.”  I said, “Must be a little bit better, right?  The name — zero.”  And yet, the name brand will cost five and even 10 times more money than the generic.  So we’ve approved more generic drugs than anybody — at a rapid pace too.

We’re also requiring that low-income patients receive the benefits of government discounts on insulin and the EpiPen, and that — you know, that is a big — that is a big deal.  That is a big deal.  Insulin is one of the most common medicines for seniors.  (Applause.)  And this is something that Seema worked on so hard.

Insulin prices soared under the last administration like you wouldn’t believe.  Right, Seema?  Under my plan, hundreds of thousands of Medicare patients will see their insulin costs capped at just $35 a month.  That’s a 66 percent cost reduction.  (Applause.)  And this feature will be avail- — available on over 1,600 Medicare plans that seniors can begin signing up for starting October 1st.  And under certain circumstances, Seema, it’s literally almost free.  This insulin, which they were just ripping you on, is close to being free — even lower than the $35 a month.  So, you did a fantastic job on that.  Thank you very much.  (Applause.)

And Seema would come to my office, “Sir, I have something so exciting.”  She worked on that for a long time in getting that done.  But it was — it is exciting.  If you need insulin — a lot of people were going without it.  They just couldn’t afford it.  Now they can definitely afford it.

We’ll accelerate our relentless effort to save seniors money on their premiums.  Since I took office, we reduced Medicare Part D premiums by 12 percent, Medicare Advantage premiums are also down dramatically — a 44 percent reduction in North Carolina — (applause).  That’s good.  Forty-three percent lower in Pennsylvania.  And a 54 percent lower price in Michigan.  So that’s something.  (Applause.)  And we have them all over the country.  All over the country, there are numbers just like that.

We’ll ensure that all seniors pay the same price for the same service, whether at a hospital, a surgery center, or a doctor’s office.  This will save seniors billions and billions of dollars a year.  We’re talking about the billions.  And it also saves our government a lot of money, but we’ll save our senior citizens billions of dollars a year.  Fantastic job.

We’re putting into place the largest package of saving for seniors of any administration in history.  No administration is even close to what we’ve done.  And I’ve said it, having to do much more than even healthcare, there’s no administration in its first three and a half years that’s done anywhere close to the things we’ve done.  And I never even get criticized for saying it.  That must mean it’s true, right?   My congressman and my great senator.  (Applause.)

Under the Democrat plan, costs will skyrocket.  Our seniors will lose the benefits they paid into their entire — I mean, they’ve been paying for their entire lives tremendous amounts of money — all to finance socialism and open borders.  I mean, we’re just helping other countries — countries that aren’t even friends of ours.  But we help our friends and we help socialism all over the world and we hurt our people, and we’re not doing that any longer.  (Applause.)

As long as I’m President, no one will lay a hand on your Medicare.  Your Medicare is going to be safe and it’s going to be solid.  (Applause.)

The final pillar of America First Healthcare Plan is better care.  That’s better care for American patients.  (Applause.)

The historic action I’m taking today includes the first-ever executive order to affirm it is the official policy of the United States government to protect patients with preexisting conditions.  So we’re making that official.  (Applause.)  We’re putting it down in a (inaudible) because our opponents, the Democrats, like to constantly talk about it, and yet preexisting conditions are much safer with us than they are with them.  And now we have it affirmed.  This is affirmed, signed, and done so we can put that to rest.  They’ll say it anyway because it’s disinformation.  (Applause.)  Disinformation.

Same thing goes for Social Security.  Remember, during the last campaign four years ago, they kept saying I was going to destroy Social Security?  I made Social Security stronger, better.  They will be the ones that destroy Social Security because they’re going to destroy our country; they will destroy our economy.  So Social Security — nothing happened.  I keep saying, “Whatever happened to Social Security?”  Remember?  “He is going to immediately attack.”  No, just the opposite.  Your Social Security is 100 percent with me, but it’s not 100 percent with them.

Any healthcare reform legislation that comes to my desk from Congress must protect the preexisting conditions or I won’t sign it.  And I made that pledge and I made that pledge last week, but now I’m making it in writing.  We’re putting it down, and we have it signed and we have it sealed.  (Applause.)

The new Democrat lie is that they will cover preexisting conditions, but in truth, the socialist takeover, economic shutdowns that they talk about — if you look at this state, frankly, where you have Democrat governors, Democrat leaders.  Those states — those states are in very, very bad shape with all of their shutdowns.

Pennsylvania — you take a look at what’s going on in Pennsylvania with the shutdown.  We just won a big court case, where a judge — a great federal judge — ruled it unconstitutional what they were doing.  They’re hurting people.  There’s damage on the side of a shutdown.  People don’t realize, with suicides, and drug use, and all of the — alcohol.  It’s a terrible thing that happens.  And Michigan is another state — the shutdown is very severe.

By the way, on November 4th, I’m sure everything will be open.  They’ll announce on the evening of November 3rd that we’re opening up.  (Applause.)  Unless these unsolicited ballots don’t come in for weeks and weeks and weeks, you know?  They want them to come in over a long period of time.  It’s going to be a very interesting day: November 3rd.  It’s going to be a very interesting day.

And coverage for illegal immigrants will collapse — our economy will collapse under their system and make your healthcare system totally insolvent.  You know that.  As great doctors and people that do this, you know that.  What they’re doing is socialized medicine, and it’s not acceptable.  It’s going to be a disaster, in terms of quality and cost.  It’ll ruin our country.

Under their plan, you’ll lose your doctor again and you will lose your coverage.  You will lose everything having to do with what we’re talking about.  On my watch, I will never let the radical left take away your healthcare.  You’ll always have healthcare.  (Applause.)

The America First Healthcare Plan will deliver another long awaited reform: We will put you in control of your own medical records when we — (applause).  Good.  We’ll require doctors to make your records available electronically, and you’ll own them, and you’ll control them, and they will be portable, and you’ll be able to work seamlessly with all of your medical providers.  It’ll make your life a lot easier.  Much, much easier.

The previous administration, led by Sleepy Joe Biden, spent $35 billion and failed to get it done.  You know that — $35 billion.  Where they failed, we are delivering.

To give critically ill patients access to lifesaving treatment, I also signed Right to Try.  You know what Right to Try is.  I’m very — (applause) — to me, Right to Try is so great.  It’s so great.

And what I think I’d like to do — I’ll do it really quickly.  I’m going to run through just a quick list of accomplishments that we’ve done.  And, you know, we’ve really become the healthcare party — the Republican Party — and nobody knows that.  (Applause.)  The news doesn’t talk about it.

But I’m going to just say — I mean, it’s a list of things that we’ve done, and it’ll go quickly, but I just thought I’d take it out.  I said, “You know, I’d like to read that to the audience of professionals today.”  And this is just a partial list.

We repealed the individual mandate; eliminated Obamacare’s health insurance, medical device, and the Cadillac taxes.  That’s a big deal.  (Applause.)  People forget all of this.  They say, “I wonder who did that?  Could it have been Joe Biden?”  He doesn’t know what it is.  (Laughter.)

Expanded association health plans; increased availability of short-term, limited-duration plans.  (Applause.)  Expanded health reimbursement arrangements — big deal.  Lowered prescription drug prices — and you will see them at a level that you will never — you’ll never see this again.  They will go down so low.  (Applause.)  And as I said, we had the largest annual decrease.  We had the only decrease over a 52-year period.

More generic prescriptions approved, savings America — saving America an estimated $2.6 billion in the first 18 months of the administration alone.  So, in 18 months, we saved $2.6 billion with generic drugs.

Signed four executive orders to lower prescription drug prices.  Signed legislation banning pharmacy gag clauses.  Does that makes sense to you?  (Applause.)  I mean, what — what people were under.  What even the pharmacist had to do was — it made them — it was embarrassing to them.

Took executive action to ensure price transparency and healthcare.  That’ll be one of the biggest things, and most people have no idea what it means.  And I said — some people said, “That’s bigger than healthcare.”

Required hospitals to post standard prices on the Internet.  Modernized and strengthened Medicare with more options, more benefits, and lower premiums substantially.  Improve kidney care — such a big deal — with more transplants and better treatment.  Kidney care is so tough for people with the problem.  (Applause.)

Very substantially lowered the price of insulin, as we said, for our seniors.  Invested in advances in generic therapy for sickle cell disease.  (Applause.)  Big thing.  Big thing.  Big, big thing.

Launched a $500 million initiative to find cures for childhood cancers — $500 million.  (Applause.)

Combated drug demand.  We really went very, very strong on drug demand and the opioid crisis with expanded access to medication-assisted treatment and lifesaving naloxone.  Naloxone.  (Applause.)  Opioid prescribed decrease by over 35 percent.  So, if you look at the opioid, obviously, horror show, it decreased by over 35 percent since January of 2017.  We’ve worked very, very hard on that.

Launched FindTreatment.gov to connect those with substance abuse disorder to treatment.  We have an incredible situation — it’s FindTreatment.gov.

Passed Right to Try to give critically ill patients access to lifesaving cures where it hasn’t been approved yet by the FDA.  Incredible.  (Applause.)  And, by the way, many of you know what that has meant.  We have had some examples of success that — on Right to Try — that have been amazing.

Launched an initiative to end AIDS — HIV/AIDS — in America.  We think, in six years, it will be largely eradicated.  Who would have ever thought?  And this could have started two years before I got there, but they chose not to do it, but we have.  And we’ve launched the initiative; it’s into it’s almost fourth year.  And at the time we did it, it was going to be 10 years — at the end of 10 years.  Now six years — we’re already down to six.  It will largely eradicate AIDS — HIV/AIDS in America.  Who would have thought?  It’s incredible.  When I first heard about it — (applause) — when I first heard about it, I said, “Why wouldn’t they have started it earlier?”  But they didn’t.

Expanded access to telehealth, especially in rural and underserved areas.  Telehealth.

Signed historic VA Choice legislation; that’s a big deal.  (Applause.)  That’s a big deal.  And it’s — it’s the real — it’s the real Choice, not the weak Choice — the very, very weak — the Choice that didn’t mean anything.  But it’s been a tremendous success.  And we just got a 91 percent approval rating from our vets — the highest we’ve ever had by a lot.  (Applause.)

And we also — while we’re at it, we signed the Accountability — VA accountability.  That’s where people who don’t love our vets — if they don’t take care of our vets, you couldn’t do anything about it.  Didn’t — you’d have to — they’d have to live in hell with these vets with — with the people that were supposed to be taking care of them.  And we have a thing called VA Accountability.  They’re accountable now.  If they don’t treat our vets great, if they don’t take care of our vets, if they don’t love our vets, our country, we can fire them.  We can say, “You’re fired.”  (Applause.)  We can fire them.  VA Accountability, that’s a big thing.  So VA Choice, VA Accountability.

Took executive action to prevent veteran suicide and launch the 24-hour veteran hotline for suicide.  And it’s really working.  (Applause.)

And signed the largest-ever increase in childcare development block grants.

Those are just — (applause) — those are just some of the — those are some of the things that we’ve done.  We’ve done actually a lot more than that, but we have to get back to business here.  Right?  Those are things that we’ve done, and nobody has any idea.

When you look at a list like that, Democrats have never done anything like that.  Under the Democrat socialist agenda, an avalanche of regulation would extinguish the flame of excellence that makes America the center of scientific discovery, groundbreaking treatment, and lifesaving cures.

In our all-out war against the virus, we’ve lifted bureaucratic barriers and marshaled America’s scientific, industrial, and technical brilliance.  And we do have total brilliance.  Some of it’s in this room, by the way, in case you don’t know.  I will apply — (applause) — it really is — some of the people.  Right?  Right, Bill?  Some incredible people in this room.

I’ll apply the same determination to accelerate medical breakthroughs in all areas, including for Alzheimer’s, diabetes, generic treatments for sickle cell disease, early detection of cancer, and much, much more.

Already, to improve care for Americans with kidney disease, we enabled patients to receive at-home dialysis, and we’re investing in the creation of an artificial kidney.  We’re getting very close.  And we introduced critical incentives to make more kidneys available for transplant, a change that will save tens of thousands of lives.  What people have to go through with kidney disease is incredible.  It’s incredible.

They work so hard.  I said, “How do they do?”  They can live a long life but it’s so much work to do it that they literally — one doctor told me that they die of hard work.  It’s such a job to go and — I guess, dialysis, et cetera.  It’s such a hard job that they die of — of — literally, they die of just hard work.  It’s — it’s incredible what we’ve done there and what we’re doing.  And especially with some of the research that’s been done, what we’re coming up with — you’ll be seeing it very soon, I believe.

As we invest in the future, we will permanently bring our medical supply chains back home.  (Applause.)  We will produce our medical supplies, pharmaceuticals, and treatments right here in the United States, right here in North Carolina.  We’re going to bring a lot of business, too.

If you remember, Puerto Rico used to do it, and then they brought tax legislation that destroyed that whole thing.  They all left.  But they are happy in Puerto Rico.  We’re going to bring it back to Puerto Rico and many of our states that — that will be doing it.  And North Carolina, I see, is on the list as being a very top one.  So we’re going to bring it back to North Carolina and the country.  (Applause.)

And we’ll reverse the disastrous and heartless decision Joe Biden made in 1996 to shut down the pharmaceutical industry in Puerto Rico.  It took place in 1996.  Biden shut down the whole Puerto Rico industry.  This was a very good industry.  They were doing a fantastic job.  And one day, it was just literally gone.  Biden shut it down with what he did with taxes.  And it was — it was a disgrace, but we will bring it back.  (Applause.)

Under our leadership, American medicine will make the biggest breakthroughs, the largest leaps, the most exciting strides, and the most outstanding discoveries.

Before I sign a historic executive order implementing this ambitious agenda, let me introduce two Americans — great Americans who will benefit from our policies.

Julia Stathopoulos was born in — Freeman-Sheldon syndrome, or with — with the Freeman-Sheldon syndrome — which is tough — an extremely rare muscle and bone disorder.  Under the previous administration, Julia’s family saw their premiums on the individual market skyrocket to $3,000 a month and more.  Her parents had to go without health insurance just to afford coverage for their children.

Since I was elected, their family’s premiums have been slashed by more than 40 percent, and we’re going down further.  (Applause.)  And everyone is now covered, and Julia always has access to the doctors she needs.  Julia, we are with you.  I don’t know where you are, Julia.  Where is Julia?  Wow.  Thank you.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  You look great, Julia.  Thank you.  That’s great.  Thank you, Julia.  It’s a great story.  But we’re inspired by your courage.  Thank you very much.

Also with us is Sharon Leader, a financial planner from nearby Concord.  After spending less than 24 hours in the hospital and receiving a few basic tests, she received surprise bills that added up to $4,000 — that’s a lot of money — despite having insurance.

Sharon, those days will soon be over, because we’ll end surprise medical billing once and for all.  Where is Sharon?  (Applause.)  Hi, Sharon.  That’s why they call it surprise billing.  She got home and she was surprised.  (Laughter.)  They sent you the bill, you opened it up, you thought it was going to be $25, and it was a little more than that, right?  Yeah.  That’s great.  Well, we’re taking care of it.  Thank you very much, Sharon.

We’re standing up for our people.  We’re standing up to special interests.  We’re taking on the powerful lobbyists.  We’re stopping the radical socialists and communists, to be honest with you.  I think we’ve gone — it’s a little bit above socialism or below it, if you want to call it that way.  But we are standing up to both — whichever one you want to choose.  And we are fighting for the incredible people of North Carolina.  They’re incredible people — people I love.  I love the people.  We named — as you know, my grandchild is named Carolina, so — (applause.)  Right?  Beautiful Carolina, my gran- — most beautiful child.

But we’re providing better care and more choice at a lower cost — substantially lower cost.  We’re delivering a healthier, safer, brighter, and more prosperous future for every citizen in our magnificent land because we are proudly putting America first.  It hasn’t happened for a long time.  (Applause.)

On behalf of all Americans, I will now sign the executive order.  I want to thank you all for being here.  God bless you.  God bless North Carolina.  And God bless America.  Thank you very much. 



